- **Type:** #[[__ 🟨 Literature Note]] | [[Slipbox]] [[Writing]] [[Systems]] [[Focus]] [[Attention]] 
- **Source:** [[🟦 How to Take Smart Notes]] p58-60
- Nowadays, we are surrounded by more distractions from focused work than ever. And the number of new possible distractions increases each day. These distractions keep us from being productive. What is worse, over time they train us to have short attention spans, making us less productive and more susceptible to distractions. 
- This leads many people to try and multi-task, or try to focus on more than one task at a time. In studies, people who multitasked felt more productive but their absolute productivity was significantly less than people who focused on one task at a time.
- There are two things we can do to aid our attention: (1) train our attention to maintain sustained focus for long periods of time and (2) work within a structure that makes it easier to stay focused.
- By focusing on one thing for a long period of time without getting distracted we can create a virtuous cycle that increases the total amount of time we're capable of focusing for. The first step to training our attention is to remove as many __possible__ distractions before we start working. The second step is to separate different kinds of tasks as much as possible, so that we can give each task the most suitable form of attention.
- Too little structure makes it both easy to get distracted and difficult to sustain focus for a long period of time. Each context switch your brain goes through is an opportunity for a distraction to intervene. Additionally, working without structure means our brains have to juggle two questions at once: What to do next and How to do it. Working within a system minimizes the effect or likelihood of both. Having a structure is one way of separating different kinds of tasks (the tasks of figuring out what to do and how to do it). And working within a defined structure removes most if not all of the context switches where a distraction would intervene.
