# Built to Last

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: Jim Collins, Jerry I. Porras

- The examples set by people like David Packard, George Merck, Walt Disney, Masaru Ibuka, Paul Galvin, and William McKnight—the Thomas Jeffersons and James Madisons of the business world—set a high standard of values and performance that many feel compelled to try to live up to. Packard and his peers did not begin as corporate giants; they began as entrepreneurs and small business people. From there they built small, cash-strapped enterprises into some of the world’s most enduring and successful corporations. One executive of a small entrepreneurial company said, “To know that they did it gave us confidence and a model to follow.”
- Many of today’s buzzwords—employee ownership, empowerment, continuous improvement, TQM, common vision, shared values, and others—are repackaged and updated versions of practices that date back, in some cases, to the 1800s.
- Chapter 1 The Best of the Best
- What is a visionary company? Visionary companies are premier institutions—the crown jewels—in their industries, widely admired by their peers and having a long track record of making a significant impact on the world around them. The key point is that a visionary company is an organization—an institution. All individual leaders, no matter how charismatic or visionary, eventually die; and all visionary products and services—all “great ideas”—eventually become obsolete. Indeed, entire markets can become obsolete and disappear. Yet visionary companies prosper over long periods of time, through multiple product life cycles and multiple generations of active leaders.
- Indeed, all of the visionary companies in our study faced setbacks and made mistakes at some point during their lives, and some are experiencing difficulty as we write this book. Yet—and this is a key point—visionary companies display a remarkable resiliency, an ability to bounce back from adversity.
- TWELVE SHATTERED MYTHS Myth 1: It takes a great idea to start a great company. Reality: Starting a company with a “great idea” might be a bad idea. Few of the visionary companies began life with a great idea. In fact, some began life without any specific idea and a few even began with outright failures. Furthermore, regardless of the founding concept, the visionary companies were significantly less likely to have early entrepreneurial success than the comparison companies in our study. Like the parable of the tortoise and the hare, visionary companies often get off to a slow start, but win the long race. Myth 2: Visionary companies require great and charismatic visionary leaders. Reality: A charismatic visionary leader is absolutely not required for a visionary company and, in fact, can be detrimental to a company’s long-term prospects. Some of the most significant CEOs in the history of visionary companies did not fit the model of the high-profile, charismatic leader—indeed, some explicitly shied away from that model. Like the founders of the United States at the Constitutional Convention, they concentrated more on architecting an enduring institution than on being a great individual leader. They sought to be clock builders, not time tellers. And they have been more this way than CEOs at the comparison companies. Myth 3: The most successful companies exist first and foremost to maximize profits. Reality: Contrary to business school doctrine, “maximizing shareholder wealth” or “profit maximization” has not been the dominant driving force or primary objective through the history of the visionary companies. Visionary companies pursue a cluster of objectives, of which making money is only one—and not necessarily the primary one. Yes, they seek profits, but they’re equally guided by a core ideology—core values and sense of purpose beyond just making money. Yet, paradoxically, the visionary companies make more money than the more purely profit-driven comparison companies. Myth 4: Visionary companies share a common subset of “correct” core values. Reality: There is no “right” set of core values for being a visionary company. Indeed, two companies can have radically different ideologies, yet both be visionary. Core values in a visionary company don’t even have to be “enlightened” or “humanistic,” although they often are. The crucial variable is not the content of a company’s ideology, but how deeply it believes its ideology and how consistently it lives, breathes, and expresses it in all that it does. Visionary companies do not ask, “What should we value?” They ask, “What do we actually value deep down to our toes?” Myth 5: The only constant is change. Reality: A visionary company almost religiously preserves its core ideology—changing it seldom, if ever. Core values in a visionary company form a rock-solid foundation and do not drift with the trends and fashions of the day; in some cases, the core values have remained intact for well over one hundred…
- In a nutshell, we had two primary objectives for the research project: 1. To identify the underlying characteristics and dynamics common to highly visionary companies (and that distinguish them from other companies) and to translate these findings into a useful conceptual framework. 2. To effectively communicate these findings and concepts so that they influence the practice of management and prove beneficial to people who want to help create, build, and maintain visionary companies.
- We therefore read extensively from nonbusiness disciplines: biology (especially evolutionary theory), genetics, psychology, social psychology, sociology, philosophy, political science, history, and cultural anthropology.
- Chapter 2 Clock Building, Not Time Telling
    - **Tags:** #summary
- Above all, there was the ability to build and build and build—never stopping, never looking back, never finishing—the institution.... In the last analysis, Walt Disney’s greatest creation was Walt Disney [the company]. RICHARD SCHICKEL, THE DISNEY VERSION
- I have concentrated all along on building the finest retailing company that we possibly could. Period. Creating a huge personal fortune was never particularly a goal of mine. SAM WALTON, FOUNDER, WAL-MART
- Imagine you met a remarkable person who could look at the sun or stars at any time of day or night and state the exact time and date: “It’s April 23, 1401, 2:36 A.M., and 12 seconds.” This person would be an amazing time teller, and we’d probably revere that person for the ability to tell time. But wouldn’t that person be even more amazing if, instead of telling the time, he or she built a clock that could tell the time forever, even after he or she was dead and gone?3 Having a great idea or being a charismatic visionary leader is “time telling”; building a company that can prosper far beyond the presence of any single leader and through multiple product life cycles is “clock building.” In the first pillar of our findings—and the subject of this chapter—we demonstrate how the builders of visionary companies tend to be clock builders, not time tellers. They concentrate primarily on building an organization—building a ticking clock—rather than on hitting a market just right with a visionary product idea and riding the growth curve of an attractive product life cycle. And instead of concentrating on acquiring the individual personality traits of visionary leadership, they take an architectural approach and concentrate on building the organizational traits of visionary companies. The primary output of their efforts is not the tangible implementation of a great idea, the expression of a charismatic personality, the gratification of their ego, or the accumulation of personal wealth. Their greatest creation is the company itself and what it stands for.
- We came upon this finding when the evidence from our research punched holes in two widely held and deeply cherished myths that have dominated popular thinking and business school education for years: the myth of the great idea and the myth of the great and charismatic leader. In one of the most fascinating and important conclusions from our research, we found that creating and building a visionary company absolutely does not require either a great idea or a great and charismatic leader. In fact, we found evidence that great ideas brought forth by charismatic leaders might be negatively correlated with building a visionary company.
- HP, Sony, and Wal-Mart put a large dent in the widely held mythology of corporate origins—a mythology that paints a picture of a far-seeing entrepreneur founding his or her company to capitalize on a visionary product idea or visionary market insight. This mythology holds that those who launch highly successful companies usually begin first and foremost with a brilliant idea (technology, product, market potential) and then ride the growth curve of an attractive product life cycle. Yet this mythology—as compelling and pervasive as it is—does not show up as a general pattern in the founding of the visionary companies. Indeed, few of the visionary companies in our study can trace their roots to a great idea or a fabulous initial product.
- In other words, we found that the visionary companies were much less likely to begin life with a “great idea” than the comparison companies in our study. Furthermore, whatever the initial founding concept, we found that the visionary companies were less likely to have early entrepreneurial success than the comparison companies. In only three of eighteen pairs did the visionary company have greater initial success than the comparison company, whereas in ten cases, the comparison company had greater initial success than the visionary company. Five cases were indistinguishable. In short, we found a negative correlation between early entrepreneurial success and becoming a highly visionary company. The long race goes to the tortoise, not the hare.
- If you are a prospective entrepreneur with the desire to start and build a visionary company but have not yet taken the plunge because you don’t have a “great idea,” we encourage you to lift from your shoulders the burden of the great-idea myth. Indeed, the evidence suggests that it might be better to not obsess on finding a great idea before launching a company. Why? Because the great-idea approach shifts your attention away from seeing the company as your ultimate creation.
- THE COMPANY ITSELF IS THE ULTIMATE CREATION In courses on strategic management and entrepreneurship, business schools teach the importance of starting first and foremost with a good idea and well-developed product/market strategy, and then jumping through the “window of opportunity” before it closes. But the people who built the visionary companies often didn’t behave or think that way. In case after case, their actions flew in the face of the theories being taught at the business schools. Thus, early in our project, we had to reject the great idea or brilliant strategy explanation of corporate success and consider a new view. We had to put on a different lens and look at the world backward. We had to shift from seeing the company as a vehicle for the products to seeing the products as a vehicle for the company. We had to embrace the crucial difference between time telling and clock building. To quickly grasp the difference between clock building and time telling, compare GE and Westinghouse in their early days. George Westinghouse was a brilliant product visionary and prolific inventor who founded fifty-nine other companies besides Westinghouse.31 Additionally, he had the insight that the world should favor the superior AC electrical system over Edison’s DC system, which it eventually did.32 But compare George Westinghouse to Charles Coffin, GE’s first president. Coffin invented not a single product…
- Luck favors the persistent. This simple truth is a fundamental cornerstone of successful company builders. The builders of visionary companies were highly persistent, living to the motto: Never, never, never give up. But what to persist with? Their answer: The company. Be prepared to kill, revise, or evolve an idea (GE moved away from its original DC system and embraced the AC system), but never give up on the company. If you equate the success of your company with success of a specific idea—as many businesspeople do—then you’re more likely to give up on the company if that idea fails; and if that idea happens to succeed, you’re more likely to have an emotional love affair with that idea and stick with it too long, when the company should be moving vigorously on to other things. But if you see the ultimate creation as…
- For example, HP learned humility early in its life, due to a string of failed and only moderately successful products. Yet Bill Hewlett and Dave Packard kept tinkering, persisting, trying, and experimenting until they figured out how to build an innovative company that would express their core values and earn a sustained reputation for great products. Trained as engineers, they could have pursued their goal by being engineers. But they didn’t. Instead, they quickly made the transition from designing products to designing an organization—creating an environment—conducive to the creation of great products. As early as the mid-1950s, Bill Hewlett displayed a clock-building perspective in an internal speech: Our engineering staff [has] remained fairly stable. This was by design rather than by accident. Engineers are creative people, so before we hired an engineer we made sure he would be operating in a stable and secure climate. We also made sure that each of our engineers had a long range opportunity with the company and suitable projects on which to work. Another thing, we made certain that we had adequate supervision so that our engineers would be happy and would be productive to the maximum extent.... [The process of] engineering is one of our most important products [emphasis added].... we are going to put on the best engineering program you have ever seen. If you think we have done well so far, just wait until two or three years from now when we get all of our new lab people producing and all of the supervisors rolling. You’ll see some real progress then!34 Dave Packard echoed the clock-building orientation in a 1964 speech: “The problem is, how do you develop an environment in which individuals can be creative? ... I believe that you have to put a good deal of thought to your organizational structure in order to provide this environment.”35 In 1973, an interviewer asked Packard what specific product decisions he considered the most important in the company’s growth. Packard’s response didn’t include one single product decision. He answered…
- In short, we found no evidence to support the hypothesis that great leadership is the distinguishing variable during the critical, formative stages of the visionary companies. Thus, as our study progressed, we had to reject the great-leader theory; it simply did not adequately explain the differences between the visionary and comparison companies.
- A high-profile, charismatic style is absolutely not required to successfully shape a visionary company. Indeed, we found that some of the most significant chief executives in the history of the visionary companies did not have the personality traits of the archetypal high-profile, charismatic visionary leader.
- The key difference, we believe, is one of orientation—the evidence suggests to us that the key people at formative stages of the visionary companies had a stronger organizational orientation than in the comparison companies, regardless of their personal leadership style. As the study progressed, in fact, we became increasingly uncomfortable with the term “leader” and began to embrace the term “architect” or “clock builder.”
- Citibank 1812–1970
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Storming the Magic Kingdom,
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- THE MESSAGE FOR CEOS, MANAGERS, AND ENTREPRENEURS One of the most important steps you can take in building a visionary company is not an action, but a shift in perspective. There will be plenty of action-oriented findings in the chapters that follow. But to make good use of them requires first and foremost acquiring the right frame of mind. And that’s the point of this chapter. We’re doing nothing less than asking you to make a shift in thinking as fundamental as those that preceded the Newtonian revolution, the Darwinian revolution, and the founding of the United States. Prior to the Newtonian revolution, people explained the world around them primarily in terms of a God that made specific decisions. A child would fall and break his arm, and it was an act of God. Crops failed; it was an act of God. People thought of an omnipotent God who made each and every specific event happen. Then in the 1600s people said, “No, that’s not it! What God did was to put in place a universe with certain principles, and what we need to do is figure out how those principles work. God doesn’t make all the decisions. He set in place processes and principles that would carry on.”89 From that point on, people began to look for basic underlying dynamics and principles of the entire system. That’s what the Newtonian revolution was all about. Similarly, the Darwinian revolution gave us a dramatic shift in thinking about biological species and natural history—a shift in thinking that provides fruitful analogies to what we’ve seen in the visionary companies. Prior to the Darwinian revolution, people primarily presumed that God created each and every species intact and for a specific role in the natural world: Polar bears are white because God created them that way, cats purr because God created them that way; robins have red breasts because God created them that way. We humans have a great need to explain the world around us by presuming that someone or something must have had it all figured out—something must have said, “We need robins with red breasts to fit here in the ecosystem.” But if the biologists are right, it doesn’t work that way. Instead of jumping directly to robins with red breasts (time telling), we have instead an underlying process of evolution (the genetic code, DNA, genetic variation and mutation, natural selection) which eventually produces robins with red breasts that appear to fit perfectly in the ecosystem.90 The beauty and functionality of the natural world springs from the success of its underlying processes and intricate mechanisms in a marvelous “ticking clock.” Likewise, we’re asking you to see the success of visionary companies—at least in part—as coming from underlying processes and fundamental dynamics embedded in the organization and not primarily the result of a single great idea or some great, all-knowing, godlike visionary who made great decisions, had great charisma, and led with great authority. If you’re involved in building and…
- Interlude No “Tyranny of the OR” (Embrace the “Genius of the AND”)
- You’ll notice throughout the rest of this book that we use the yin/yang symbol from Chinese dualistic philosophy. We’ve consciously selected this symbol to represent a key aspect of highly visionary companies: They do not oppress themselves with what we call the “Tyranny of the OR”—the rational view that cannot easily accept paradox, that cannot live with two seemingly contradictory forces or ideas at the same time. The “Tyranny of the OR” pushes people to believe that things must be either A OR B, but not both. It makes such proclamations as: • “You can have change OR stability.” • “You can be conservative OR bold.” • “You can have low cost OR high quality.” • “You can have creative autonomy OR consistency and control.” • “You can invest for the future OR do well in the short-term.” • “You can make progress by methodical planning OR by opportunistic groping.” • “You can create wealth for your shareholders OR do good for the world.” • “You can be idealistic (values-driven) OR pragmatic (profit-driven).” Instead of being oppressed…
- We’re not talking about mere balance here. “Balance” implies going to the midpoint, fifty-fifty, half and half. A visionary company doesn’t seek balance between short-term and long-term, for example. It seeks to do very well in the short-term and very well in the long-term. A visionary company doesn’t simply balance between idealism and profitability; it seeks to be highly idealistic and highly profitable. A visionary company doesn’t simply balance between preserving a tightly held core ideology and stimulating vigorous change and movement; it does both to an extreme. In short, a highly visionary company doesn’t want to blend yin and yang into a gray, indistinguishable circle that is neither highly yin nor highly yang; it aims to be distinctly yin and distinctly yang—both at the same time, all the time. Irrational? Perhaps. Rare? Yes. Difficult? Absolutely. But as F. Scott Fitzgerald pointed out, “The test of a first-rate intelligence is the ability to hold two opposed ideas in the mind at the same time, and still retain the ability to function.”1 This is exactly what the visionary companies are able to do.
- Chapter 3 More Than Profits
- Our basic principles have endured intact since our founders conceived them. We distinguish between core values and practices; the core values don’t change, but the practices might. We’ve also remained clear that profit—as important as it is—is not why the Hewlett-Packard Company exists; it exists for more fundamental reasons. JOHN YOUNG, FORMER CEO, HEWLETT-PACKARD, 19921
- We are in the business of preserving and improving human life. All of our actions must be measured by our success in achieving this goal. MERCK & COMPANY, INTERNAL MANAGEMENT GUIDE, 19892
- Values and Visions: A Merck Century.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Did Merck’s ideals—ideals that had consistently defined the company’s self-identity since the late 1920s—drive the Mectizan decision? Or did Merck make the decision for pragmatic reasons—good long-term business and good PR? Our answer: Both. Merck’s ideals played a substantial role in the decision and the evidence suggests that Merck would have gone ahead with the project regardless of whether it created long-term business benefits for the company. But the evidence also suggests that Merck acted on the assumption that such acts of goodwill “somehow ... always pay off.” This is a classic example of the “Genius of the AND” prevailing over the “Tyranny of the OR.” Merck has displayed throughout most of its history both high ideals and pragmatic self-interest.
- Our research showed that a fundamental element in the “ticking clock” of a visionary company is a core ideology—core values and sense of purpose beyond just making money—that guides and inspires people throughout the organization and remains relatively fixed for long periods of time.
    - **Note:** 2. Core ideology
- Now, you might be thinking: “Of course it’s easy for a company like Merck to proclaim and pursue inspirational ideals—Merck makes drugs that do in fact save lives, cure disease, and relieve suffering.” Good point, and we agree. But in contrast to its comparison company, Pfizer—a company in the same industry, a company that also makes drugs that save lives, cure diseases, and relieve suffering—we found Merck to have been more ideologically driven. Whereas Merck titled its history Values and Visions, Pfizer titled its history, Pfizer ... An Informal History. Whereas Merck has explicitly and prominently articulated a consistent set of high ideals for four generations, we found no evidence of similar discussions at Pfizer until the late 1980s. Nor did we find at Pfizer any incident analogous to the Mectizan or streptomycin decisions at Merck.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- The Sony Vision
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Concept of the Corporation,
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- My Years with General Motors....
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices,
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Merck, Sony, and Ford each offer a different slice of a general pattern: the existence of a core ideology as a primary element in the historical development of visionary companies. Like the fundamental ideals of a great nation, church, school, or any other enduring institution, core ideology in a visionary company is a set of basic precepts that plant a fixed stake in the ground: “This is who we are; this is what we stand for; this is what we’re all about.” Like the guiding principles embodied in the American Declaration of Independence (“We hold these truths to be self-evident...”) and echoed eighty-seven years later in the Gettysburg Address (“a ... nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal”), core ideology is so fundamental to the institution that it changes seldom, if ever.
- Contrary to business school doctrine, we did not find “maximizing shareholder wealth” or “profit maximization” as the dominant driving force or primary objective through the history of most of the visionary companies. They have tended to pursue a cluster of objectives, of which making money is only one—and not necessarily the primary one. Indeed, for many of the visionary companies, business has historically been more than an economic activity, more than just a way to make money. Through the history of most of the visionary companies we saw a core ideology that transcended purely economic considerations. And—this is the key point—they have had core ideology to a greater degree than the comparison companies in our study. A detailed pair-by-pair analysis showed that the visionary companies have generally been more ideologically driven and less purely profit-driven than the comparison companies in seventeen out of eighteen pairs. (See Table A.4 in Appendix 3.) This is one of the clearest differences we found between the visionary and comparison companies. Of course, we’re not saying that the visionary companies have been uninterested in profitability or long-term shareholder wealth (notice that we say that they are “more than” economic entities, not “other than”). Yes, they pursue profits. And, yes, they pursue broader, more meaningful ideals. Profit maximization does not rule, but the visionary companies pursue their aims profitably. They do both.
- After a short preliminary welcome, Packard began his talk: I want to discuss why [emphasis his] a company exists in the first place. In other words, why are we here? I think many people assume, wrongly, that a company exists simply to make money. While this is an important result of a company’s existence, we have to go deeper and find the real reasons for our being. As we investigate this, we inevitably come to the conclusion that a group of people get together and exist as an institution that we call a company so they are able to accomplish something collectively that they could not accomplish separately—they make a contribution to society, a phrase which sounds trite but is fundamental.... You can look around [in the general business world] and still see people who are interested in money and nothing else, but the underlying drives come largely from a desire to do something else—to make a product—to give a service—generally to do something which is of value. So with that in mind, let us discuss why the Hewlett-Packard Company exists.... The real reason for our existence is that we provide something which is unique [that makes a contribution].24
- “Profit,” according to Packard, “is not the proper end and aim of management—it is what makes all of the proper ends and aims possible.”25
- For TI, bigger was better, period—even if the products were low-quality or made no technical contribution. For HP, bigger was better only within the context of making a contribution.
- The greatest pleasure life has to offer is the satisfaction that flows from... participating in a difficult and constructive undertaking.
- Legend and Legacy,
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- IN short, we did not find any specific ideological content essential to being a visionary company. Our research indicates that the authenticity of the ideology and the extent to which a company attains consistent alignment with the ideology counts more than the content of the ideology.
- Core Ideologies in the Visionary Companies 3M74 • Innovation; “Thou shalt not kill a new product idea”   • Absolute integrity   • Respect for individual initiative and personal growth   • Tolerance for honest mistakes   • Product quality and reliability   • “Our real business is solving problems”     American Express75 • Heroic customer service   • Worldwide reliability of services   • Encouragement of individual initiative     Boeing76 • Being on the leading edge of aeronautics; being pioneers   • Tackling huge challenges and risks   • Product safety and quality   • Integrity and ethical business   • To “eat, breathe, and sleep the world of aeronautics”     Citicorp77 • Expansionism—of size, of services offered, of geographic presence   • Being out front—such as biggest, best, most innovative, most profitable   • Autonomy and entrepreneurship (via decentralization)   • Meritocracy   • Aggressiveness and self-confidence     Ford78 • People as the source of our strength   • Products as the “end result of our efforts” (we are about cars)   • Profits as a necessary means and measure for our success   • Basic honesty and integrity (NOTE: This is the order from 1980s Ford MVGP document. At different points in Ford’s history, the order has varied.)     General Electric79 • Improving the quality of life through technology and innovation   • Interdependent balance between responsibility to customers, employees, society, and shareholders (no clear hierarchy)   • Individual responsibility and opportunity   • Honesty and integrity     Hewlett-Packard80 • Technical contribution to fields in which we participate (“We exist as a corporation to make a contribution”)   • Respect and opportunity for HP people, including the opportunity to share in the success of the enterprise   • Contribution and responsibility to the communities in which we operate   • Affordable quality for HP customers   • Profit and growth as a means to make all of the other values and objectives possible     IBM81 • Give full consideration to the individual employee   • Spend a lot of time making customers happy   • Go the last mile to do things right; seek superiority in all we undertake     Johnson & Johnson82 • The company exists “to alleviate pain and disease”   • “We have a hierarchy of responsibilities: customers first, employees second, society at large third, and shareholders fourth” (see the credo reproduced elsewhere in this book)   • Individual opportunity and reward based on merit   • Decentralization = Creativity = Productivity     Marriott83 • Friendly service & excellent value (customers are guests); “make people away from home feel that they’re among friends and really wanted”   • People are number 1—treat them well, expect a lot, and the rest will follow   • Work hard, yet keep it fun   • Continual self-improvement   • Overcoming adversity to build character     Merck84 • “We are in the business of preserving and improving human life. All of our actions must be measured by…
- Core Ideology = Core Values + Purpose Core Values = The organization’s essential and enduring tenets—a small set of general guiding principles; not to be confused with specific cultural or operating practices; not to be compromised for financial gain or short-term expediency. Purpose = The organization’s fundamental reasons for existence beyond just making money—a perpetual guiding star on the horizon; not to be confused with specific goals or business strategies.
- A Business and Its Beliefs:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Visionary companies tend to have only a few core values, usually between three and six. In fact, we found none of the visionary companies to have more than six core values, and most have less. And, indeed, we should expect this, for only a few values can be truly core—values so fundamental and deeply held that they will change or be compromised seldom, if ever.
- A very important point: We strongly encourage you not to fall into the trap of using the core values from the visionary companies (listed in Table 3.1) as a source for core values in your own organization. Core ideology does not come from mimicking the values of other companies—even highly visionary companies; it does not come from following the dictates of outsiders; it does not come from reading management books; and it does not come from a sterile intellectual exercise of “calculating” what values would be most pragmatic, most popular, or most profitable. When articulating and codifying core ideology, the key step is to capture what is authentically believed, not what other companies set as their values or what the outside world thinks the ideology should be.
- Indeed, a visionary company continually pursues but never fully achieves or completes its purpose—like chasing the earth’s horizon or pursuing a guiding star. Walt Disney captured the enduring, never-completed nature of purpose when he commented: Disneyland will never be completed, as long as there is imagination left in the world.103
- As an implication of this, if you’re thinking about purpose for your own organization, we encourage you to not simply write a specific description of your product lines or customer segments (“We exist to make X products for Y customers”). For example, “We exist to make cartoons for kids” would have been a terrible purpose statement for Disney, neither compelling nor flexible enough to last one hundred years. But “to use our imagination to bring happiness to millions” can easily last one hundred years as a compelling purpose. The important step is to get at the deeper, more fundamental reasons for the organization’s existence. An effective way to get at purpose is to pose the question “Why not just shut this organization down, cash out, and sell off the assets?” and to push for an answer that would be equally valid both now and one hundred years into the future.
- Not all of the visionary companies began life with a well-articulated core ideology. A few did. Robert W. Johnson, for example, had a sense of J&J’s purpose from the moment he conceived the company (“to alleviate pain and disease”).105 So did Masaru Ibuka of Sony when he wrote the company’s 1946 prospectus. But others, like HP and Motorola, didn’t pin down their ideology until after the company had solidly passed the initial start-up phase, often a decade or so after founding (but usually before they became big companies). In the early stages, most visionary companies just tried to get off the ground and make a go of it and their ideology became clear only as the company evolved. So if you haven’t yet articulated a core ideology because you’ve been in the throes of launching a company, that’s okay. But the earlier, the better. In fact, if you’ve made time to read this book, then we encourage you to set aside the time to articulate your ideology now.
- Chapter 4 Preserve the Core/Stimulate Progress
- In the previous chapter, we presented core ideology as an essential component of a visionary company. But core ideology alone, as important as it is, does not—indeed cannot—make a visionary company. A company can have the world’s most deeply cherished and meaningful core ideology, but if it just sits still or refuses to change, the world will pass it by. As Sam Walton pointed out: “You can’t just keep doing what works one time, because everything around you is always changing. To succeed, you have to stay out in front of that change.”3 Similarly, Thomas J. Watson, Jr., embedded a huge caveat in his booklet A Business and Its Beliefs: If an organization is to meet the challenges of a changing world, it must be prepared to change everything about itself except [its basic] beliefs as it moves through corporate life.... The only sacred cow in an organization should be its basic philosophy of doing business. [emphasis ours]4
- We believe IBM began to lose its stature as a visionary company in the late 1980s and early 1990s in part because it lost sight of Watson’s incisive caveat. Nowhere in IBM’s “three basic beliefs”* do we see anything about white shirts, blue suits, specific policies, specific procedures, organizational hierarchies, mainframe computers—or computers at all, for that matter. Blue suits and white shirts are not core values. Mainframe computers are not core values. Specific policies, procedures, and practices are not core values. IBM should have much more vigorously changed everything about itself except its core values. Instead, it stuck too long to strategic and operating practices and cultural manifestations of the core values.
- We’ve found that companies get into trouble by confusing core ideology with specific, noncore practices. By confusing core ideology with noncore practices, companies can cling too long to noncore items—things that should be changed in order for the company to adapt and move forward. This brings us to a crucial point: A visionary company carefully preserves and protects its core ideology, yet all the specific manifestations of its core ideology must be open for change and evolution. For example: • HP’s “Respect and concern for individual employees” is a permanent, unchanging part of its core ideology; serving fruit and doughnuts to all employees at ten A.M. each day is a noncore practice that can change. • Wal-Mart’s “Exceed customer expectations” is a permanent, unchanging part of its core ideology; customer greeters at the front door is a noncore practice that can change. • Boeing’s “Being on the leading edge of aviation; being pioneers” is a permanent, unchanging part of its core ideology; commitment to building jumbo jets is part of a noncore strategy that can change. • 3M’s “Respect for individual initiative” is a permanent, unchanging part of its core ideology; the 15 percent rule (where technical employees can spend 15 percent of their time on projects of their choosing) is a noncore practice that can change. • Nordstrom’s “Service to the customer above all else” is a permanent, unchanging part of its core ideology; regional geographic focus, piano players in the lobby, and overstocked inventory management are non-core practices that can change. • Merck’s “We are in the business of preserving and improving human life” is a permanent, unchanging part of its core ideology; its commitment to research targeted at specific diseases is part of a noncore strategy that can change. It is absolutely essential to not confuse…
- This brings us to the central concept of this book: the underlying dynamic of “Preserve the core and stimulate progress” that’s…
- Core ideology in a visionary company works hand in hand with a relentless drive for progress that impels change and forward movement in all that is not part of the core ideology. The drive for progress arises from a deep human urge—to explore, to create, to discover, to achieve, to change, to improve. The drive for progress is not a sterile, intellectual recognition that “progress is healthy in a changing world” or that “healthy organizations should change and improve” or that “we should have goals”; rather, it’s a deep, inner, compulsive—almost primal—drive. It is the type of drive that led Sam Walton to spend time during the last precious few days of his life discussing sales figures for the week with a local store manager who dropped by his hospital…
- It is the drive that led Boeing to undertake some of the boldest gambles in business history, including the decision to build the B-747 in spite of highly uncertain market demand—a drive articulated by William E. Boeing during the early days, of the company: It behooves no-one to dismiss any novel idea with the statement that it “can’t be done.” Our job is to keep everlastingly at research and experiment, to adapt our laboratories to production as soon as practicable, to let no new improvement in flying and flying equipment pass us by.
- Indeed, the drive for progress is never satisfied with the status quo, even when the status quo is working well. Like a persistent and incurable itch, the drive for progress in a highly visionary company can never be satisfied under any conditions, even if the company succeeds enormously: “We can always do better; we can always go further; we can always find new possibilities.” As Henry Ford said, “You have got to keep doing and going.”
    - **Note:** Aim high.
      Be bold.
      Don't give up.
- Like core ideology, the drive for progress is an internal force. The drive for progress doesn’t wait for the external world to say “It’s time to change” or “It’s time to improve” or “It’s time to invent something new.” No, like the drive inside a great artist or prolific inventor, it is simply there, pushing outward and onward. You don’t create Disneyland, build the 747, pursue six-sigma quality, invent 3M Post-it notes, institute employee stock ownership in the 1880s, or meet with a store manager on your deathbed because the outside environment demands it. These things arise out of an inner urge for progress. In a visionary company, the drive to go further, to do better, to create new possibilities needs no external justification.
- Indeed, core ideology and the drive for progress exist together in a visionary company like yin and yang of Chinese dualistic philosophy; each element enables, complements, and reinforces the other: • The core ideology enables progress by providing a base of continuity around which a visionary company can evolve, experiment, and change. By being clear about what is core (and therefore relatively fixed), a company can more easily seek variation and movement in all that is not core. • The drive for progress enables the core ideology, for without continual change and forward movement, the company—the carrier of the core—will fall behind in an ever-changing world and cease to be strong, or perhaps even to exist.
- Although the core ideology and drive for progress usually trace their roots to specific individuals, a highly visionary company institutionalizes them—weaving them into the very fabric of the organization.
- We’ve found that organizations often have great intentions and inspiring visions for themselves, but they don’t take the crucial step of translating their intentions into concrete items. Even worse, they often tolerate organization characteristics, strategies, and tactics that are misaligned with their admirable intentions, which creates confusion and cynicism. The gears and mechanisms of the ticking clock do not grind against each other but rather work in concert—in alignment with each other—to preserve the core and stimulate progress. The builders of visionary companies seek alignment in strategies, in tactics, in organization systems, in structure, in incentive systems, in building layout, in job design—in everything.
- IF you are involved in building and managing an organization, the single most important point to take away from this book is the critical importance of creating tangible mechanisms aligned to preserve the core and stimulate progress. This is the essence of clock building.
- In the chapters that follow, we will describe the specific methods of preserving the core and stimulating progress that distinguished the visionary companies from the comparison companies, capped by a concluding chapter on alignment. They fall into five categories: • Big Hairy Audacious Goals (BHAGs): Commitment to challenging, audacious—and often risky—goals and projects toward which a visionary company channels its efforts (stimulates progress). • Cult-like Cultures: Great places to work only for those who buy in to the core ideology; those who don’t fit with the ideology are ejected like a virus (preserves the core). • Try a Lot of Stuff and Keep What Works: High levels of action and experimentation—often unplanned and undirected—that produce new and unexpected paths of progress and enables visionary companies to mimic the biological evolution of species (stimulates progress). • Home-grown Management: Promotion from within, bringing to senior levels only those who’ve spent significant time steeped in the core ideology of the company (preserves the core). • Good Enough Never Is: A continual process of relentless self-improvement with the aim of doing better and better, forever into the future (stimulates progress). We will provide examples, anecdotes, and systematic evidence to support and illustrate each of these methods. As you read each of these chapters, we encourage you to use our overall framework as a guide for diagnosing your own organization: • Has it made the shift in perspective from time telling to clock building? • Does, it reject the “Tyranny of the OR” and embrace the “Genius of the AND”? • Does it have a core ideology—core values and purpose beyond just making money? • Does it have a drive for progress—an almost primal urge for change and forward movement in all that is not part of the core ideology? • Does it preserve the core and stimulate progress through tangible practices, such as Big Hairy Audacious Goals, home-grown management, and the others described throughout the remainder of this book? • Is the organization in alignment, so that people receive a consistent set of signals to reinforce behavior that supports the core ideology and achieves desired progress? When you finish reading the next six chapters, you should have a sizable mental list of specific, tangible things that might make sense for you to implement in your own organization to make it more visionary. It doesn’t matter whether you’re a CEO, manager, individual contributor, or entrepreneur. You can put these ideas to work.
- Chapter 5 Big Hairy Audacious Goals
- Far better to dare mighty things, to win glorious triumphs, even though checkered by failure, than to take rank with those poor spirits who neither enjoy much nor suffer much, because they live in the gray twilight that knows not victory, nor defeat. THEODORE ROOSEVELT, 1899
- Of all the things I’ve done, the most vital is coordinating the talents of those who work for us and pointing them toward a certain goal. WALTER ELIAS DISNEY, FOUNDER, WALT DISNEY COMPANY, 19543
- Put yourself in the shoes of Boeing’s management team in 1952. Your engineers have the idea to build a large jet aircraft for the commercial market. Your company has virtually no presence in the commercial market and your earlier commercial attempts have been failures. You’ve been building aircraft primarily for the military (B-17 Flying Fortress, B-29 Superfortress, B-52 jet bomber) and four-fifths of your business comes from one customer—the Air Force.4 Furthermore, your sales force reports that commercial airlines in both the United States and Europe have expressed little interest in the idea of a commercial jet from Boeing. The airlines have an anti-Boeing bias—a “they build great bombers, period” attitude. No other aircraft company has proved that there is a commercial market for jet aircraft. Rival Douglas Aircraft believes that propeller-driven planes will continue to dominate the commercial market. Your company still has memories of the painful layoffs from fifty-one thousand employees down to seventy-five hundred after the end of World War II.5 And, for the clincher, you estimate that it will cost about three times your average annual after-tax profit for the past five years—roughly a quarter of your entire corporate net worth—to develop a prototype for the jet.6 (Fortunately, you believe that you could also offer this jet aircraft to the military as a fueling plane for the military, but you still need to gamble the $15 million of your own money to develop the prototype.)7 What should you do? If you’re Boeing’s management, you defy the odds and commit to the audacious goal of establishing yourself as a major player in the commercial aircraft industry. You build the jet. You call it the 707. And you bring the commercial world into the jet age. In contrast, Douglas Aircraft (later to become McDonnell Douglas, Boeing’s comparison counterpart in our study) made the explicit decision to stick with piston propellers and take a cautious wait-and-see approach to commercial jet aircraft.8 Douglas waited and saw Boeing fly right past and seize dominant control of the commercial market. Even as late as 1957—the year, according to Business Week, that the airlines “fell all over each other in their rush to replace piston planes”9—Douglas still did not have a jet ready for market. Finally, in 1958, Douglas introduced the DC-8, but never caught up to Boeing. Perhaps you’re thinking, “But might Boeing have just been lucky? Boeing looks smart in retrospect, but it could just as easily have been wrong.” Good point. And we would be inclined to agree, except for one thing: Boeing has a long and consistent history of committing itself to big, audacious challenges. Looking as far back as the early 1930s, we see this bold commitment behavior at Boeing when it set the goal of becoming a major force in the military aircraft market and gambled its future on the P-26 military plane and then “bet the pot” on the B-17 Flying Fortress.
- BHAGS: A POWERFUL MECHANISM TO STIMULATE PROGRESS Boeing Corporation is an excellent example of how highly visionary companies often use bold missions—or what we prefer to call BHAGs (pronounced bee-hags, short for “Big Hairy Audacious Goals”)—as a particularly powerful mechanism to stimulate progress.
- A Clear—and Compelling—Goal Like the moon mission, a true BHAG is clear and compelling and serves as a unifying focal point of effort—often creating immense team spirit. It has a clear finish line, so the organization can know when it has achieved the goal; people like to shoot for finish lines.
- The point here is not that GE had the “right” goal and Westinghouse had the “wrong” goal. The point is that GE’s goal was clear, compelling, and more likely to stimulate progress, like the moon mission. Whether a company has the right BHAG or whether the BHAG gets people going in the right direction are not irrelevant questions, but they miss the essential point. Indeed, the essential point of a BHAG is better captured in such questions as: “Does it stimulate forward progress? Does it create momentum? Does it get people going?
- Ironically, however, once Ford had achieved its big hairy goal of democratizing the automobile, it didn’t set a new BHAG, became complacent, and watched GM set and achieve the equally audacious goal of overcoming Ford. We should emphasize here that a BHAG only helps an organization as long as it has not yet been achieved. Ford suffered from what we call the “we’ve arrived” syndrome—a complacent lethargy that can arise once a company has achieved one BHAG and does not replace it with another. (As an aside, if your organization has a BHAG, you might want to think about what’s next before you complete the current one. Also, if you find your organization is in a state of malaise, you might ask yourself if you once had a BHAG—either implicit or explicit—that you’ve attained and not replaced with a new one.)
- It’s not just the presence of a goal that stimulates progress, it is also the level of commitment to the goal. Indeed, a goal cannot be classified as a BHAG without a high level of commitment to the goal.
- Again, as discussed in the chapter on core ideology, we see that highly visionary behavior occurs when the company does not view business as ultimately about maximizing profitability. IBM had to be number one and go for the 360 not just to make money, but because it was IBM.
- We like to try the impractical and impossible and prove it to be both practical and possible—if it’s the right thing to do in the first place. . . . You do something you think is right. If it clicks, you give it a ride. If you hit, mortgage the farm and go for broke.47
- THE BHAGs looked more audacious to outsiders than to insiders. The visionary companies didn’t see their audacity as taunting the gods. It simply never occurred to them that they couldn’t do what they set out to do.
- We wish to emphasize that the key mechanism at work here is not charismatic leadership. Returning to the moon mission example, we cannot deny that John F. Kennedy had a charismatic leadership style, nor can we deny that he deserves much of the credit for seriously proposing the imaginative and bold goal of going to the moon and back before the end of the decade. Nonetheless, Kennedy’s leadership style was not the primary mechanism at work for stimulating progress. Kennedy died in 1963; he was no longer present to urge, prod, inspire—to “lead” to the moon. After Kennedy’s death, did the moon mission become any less inspiring? Did it grind to a halt? Did going to the moon cease to provide a sense of national momentum? Of course not! The beauty of the moon mission, once launched, was its ability to stimulate progress regardless of whoever happened to be president. Was it any less exciting to land on the moon with Richard Nixon in office than John F. Kennedy? No. The goal itself became the motivating mechanism.
- Corporations regularly face the dilemma of how to maintain momentum after the departure of highly energetic leaders (often founders). We saw this “postheroic leader stall” at a number of comparison companies in our study: Burroughs (after Boyer), Chase Manhattan (after Rockefeller), Columbia (after Cohn), Howard Johnson (after Johnson, Sr.), Melville (after Melville), TI (after Haggarty), Westinghouse (after George Westinghouse), and Zenith (after MacDonald). We didn’t see this pattern as much in the visionary companies—only two clear cases stand out: Walt Disney (after Walt Disney) and Ford Motor (after Henry Ford, Sr.). The visionary companies offer a partial solution: Create BHAGs that take a life of their own and thereby act as a stimulus through multiple generations of leadership. (If you are a soon-to-retire chief executive, we encourage you to take a hard look at this lesson. Does your company have a BHAG to which it is committed and that will provide momentum long after you’re gone? And, even more important, does it have the ability to continually set bold new goals for itself long into the future?)
- Here are a few key take-away points you might want to keep in mind as you consider BHAGs for your own organization: • A BHAG should be so clear and compelling that it requires little or no explanation. Remember, a BHAG is a goal—like climbing a mountain or going to moon—not a “statement.” If it doesn’t get people’s juices going, then it’s just not a BHAG. • A BHAG should fall well outside the comfort zone. People in the organization should have reason to believe they can pull it off, yet it should require heroic effort and perhaps even a little luck—as with the IBM 360 and Boeing 707. • A BHAG should be so bold and exciting in its own right that it would continue to stimulate progress even if the organization’s leaders disappeared before it had been completed—as happened at Citibank and Wal-Mart. • A BHAG has the inherent danger that, once achieved, an organization can stall and drift in the “we’ve arrived” syndrome, as happened at Ford in the 1920s. A company should be prepared to prevent this by having follow-on BHAGs. It should also complement BHAGs with the other methods of stimulating progress. • Finally, and most important of all, a BHAG should be consistent with a company’s core ideology.
- BHAGs alone do not make a visionary company. Indeed, progress alone—no matter what the mechanism used to stimulate progress—does not make a visionary company. A company should be careful to preserve its core while pursuing BHAGs.
- Chapter 6 Cult-Like Cultures
- We learned that you don’t need to create a “soft” or “comfortable” environment to build a visionary company. We found that the visionary companies tend to be more demanding of their people than other companies, both in terms of performance and congruence with the ideology.
- “VISIONARY,” we learned, does not mean soft and undisciplined. Quite the contrary. Because the visionary companies have such clarity about who they are, what they’re all about, and what they’re trying to achieve, they tend to not have much room for people unwilling or unsuited to their demanding standards.
- During a research team meeting, one of our research assistants made the observation, “Joining these companies reminds me of joining an extremely tight-knit group or society. And if you don’t fit, you’d better not join. If you’re willing to really buy in and dedicate yourself to what the company stands for, then you’ll be very satisfied and productive—probably couldn’t be happier. If not, however, you’ll probably flounder, feel miserable and out-of-place, and eventually leave—ejected like a virus. It’s binary: You’re either in or you’re out, and there seems to be no middle ground. It’s almost cult-like.” The observation rang true enough that we decided to examine the literature on cults and see if the visionary companies have indeed had more characteristics in common with cults than the comparison companies. We found no universally accepted definition of cult in the literature; the most common definition is that a cult is a body of persons characterized by great or excessive devotion to some person, idea, or thing (which certainly describes many of the visionary companies). Nor did we find any universally accepted checklist of what separates cults from noncults. We did, however, find some common themes, and in particular we found four common characteristics of cults that the visionary companies display to a greater degree than the comparison companies.43 • Fervently held ideology (discussed earlier in our chapter on core ideology) • Indoctrination • Tightness of fit • Elitism
- Nordstrom presents an excellent example of what we came to call “cultism”—a series of practices that create an almost cult-like environment around the core ideology in highly visionary companies. These practices tend to vigorously screen out those who do not fit with the ideology (either before hiring or early in their careers). They also instill an intense sense of loyalty and influence the behavior of those remaining inside the company to be congruent with the core ideology, consistent over time, and carried out zealously.
- An analysis of the visionary versus comparison companies revealed the following (see Table A.6 in the Appendix 3): • In eleven out of eighteen pairs, the evidence shows stronger indoctrination into a core ideology through the history of the visionary company than the comparison company.* • In thirteen out of eighteen pairs, the evidence shows greater tightness of fit through the history of the visionary company than in the comparison company—people tend to either fit well with the company and its ideology or tend to not fit at all (“buy in or get out”). • In thirteen out of eighteen pairs, the evidence shows greater elitism (a sense of belonging to something special and superior) through the history of the visionary company. • Summing up across all three dimensions (indoctrination, tightness of fit, and elitism), the visionary companies have shown greater cultism through history than the comparison companies in fourteen out of eighteen pairs (four pairs are indistinguishable).
- The IBM Way:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- IBM: A Special Company:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Prince of the Magic Kingdom:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Eyes on Tomorrow
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- You might find yourself somewhat uncomfortable with the findings in this chapter. We share some of that discomfort, and we wish to be clear that we’re certainly not advocating (or even describing) the extreme Jim Jones, David Koresh, or Reverend Sun Myung Moon type of situation. It is important to understand that, unlike many religious sects or social movements which often revolve around a charismatic cult leader (a “cult of personality”), visionary companies tend to be cult-like around their ideologies. Notice, for example, how Nordstrom created a zealous and fanatical reverence for its core values, shaping a powerful mythology about the customer service heroics of its employees, rather than demanding slavish reverence for an individual leader. Disney’s zealous protection of its values transcended Walt and remained largely intact decades after his death. P&G remained tightly dedicated to its principles for over 150 years, through nine generations of top management. Cultism around an individual personality is time telling; creating an environment that reinforces dedication to an enduring core ideology is clock building. THE point of this chapter is not that you should set out to create a cult of personality. That’s the last thing you should do. Rather, the point is to build an organization that fervently preserves its core ideology in specific, concrete ways. The visionary companies translate their ideologies into tangible mechanisms aligned to send a consistent set of reinforcing signals. They indoctrinate people, impose tightness of fit, and create a sense of belonging to something special through such practical, concrete items as: • Orientation and ongoing training programs that have ideological as well as practical content, teaching such things as values, norms, history, and tradition • Internal “universities” and training centers • On-the-job socialization by peers and immediate supervisors. • Rigorous up-through-the-ranks policies—hiring young, promoting from within, and shaping the employee’s mind-set from a young age • Exposure to a pervasive mythology of “heroic deeds” and corporate exemplars (for example, customer heroics letters, marble statues) • Unique language and terminology (such as “cast members,” “Motorolans”) that reinforce a frame of reference and the sense of belonging to a special, elite group • Corporate songs, cheers, affirmations, or pledges that reinforce psychological commitment • Tight screening processes, either during hiring or within the first few years • Incentive and advancement criteria explicitly linked to fit with the corporate ideology • Awards, contests, and public recognition that reward those who display great effort consistent with the ideology. Tangible and visible penalties for those who break ideological boundaries • Tolerance for honest mistakes that do not breach the company’s ideology (“non-sins”); severe penalties or termination for breaching the ideology (“sins”) • “Buy-in” mechanisms (financial,…
- In a classic example of the “Genius of the AND” prevailing over the “Tyranny of the OR,” visionary companies impose tight ideological control and simultaneously provide wide operating autonomy that encourages individual initiative. In fact, as we will discuss in the next chapter, we found that the visionary companies were significantly more decentralized and granted greater operational autonomy than the comparison companies as a general pattern, even though they have been much more cult-like.97 Ideological control preserves the core while operational autonomy stimulates progress.
- Nordstrom reminds us of the United States Marine Corps—tight, controlled, and disciplined, with little room for those who will not or cannot conform to the ideology. Yet, paradoxically, those without individual initiative and entrepreneurial instincts will just us likely fail at Nordstrom as those who do not share the ideological tenets. The same holds at other ideologically tight visionary companies like 3M, J&J, Merck, HP, and Wal-Mart. This finding has massive practical implications. It means that companies seeking an “empowered” or decentralized work environment should first and foremost impose a tight ideology, screen and indoctrinate people into that ideology, eject the viruses, and give those who remain the tremendous sense of responsibility that comes with membership in an elite organization. It means getting the right actors on the stage, putting them in the right frame of mind, and then giving them the freedom to ad lib as they see fit. It means, in short, understanding that cult-like tightness around an ideology actually enables a company to turn people loose to experiment, change, adapt, and—above all—to act.
- IBM: Colossus in Transition
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Chapter 7 Try a Lot of Stuff and Keep What Works
- Our company has, indeed, stumbled onto some of its new products. But never forget that you can only stumble if you’re moving. RICHARD P. CARLTON, FORMER CEO, 3M CORPORATION, 19502
- In examining the history of the visionary companies, we were struck by how often they made some of their best moves not by detailed strategic planning, but rather by experimentation, trial and error, opportunism, and—quite literally—accident. What looks in hindsight like a brilliant strategy was often the residual result of opportunistic experimentation and “purposeful accidents.”
- Robert O’Brian in the book Marriott.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- American Express 1850–1950, Alden Hatch
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Jon Friedman and John Meehan in House of Cards:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- We’re not saying that these companies never had plans. But we were surprised to find so many examples of key moves by the visionary companies that came about by some process other than planning. Nor do these examples merely represent random luck. No, we found something else at work. These provocative examples led us to a second type of progress (the first was BHAGs) stimulated by the visionary companies to a greater degree than the comparison companies: evolutionary progress. The word “evolutionary” describes this type of progress because it closely resembles how organic species evolve and adapt to their natural environments. Evolutionary progress differs from BHAG progress in two key ways. First, whereas BHAG progress involves clear and unambiguous goals (“We’re going to climb that mountain”), evolutionary progress involves ambiguity (“By trying lots of different approaches, we’re bound to stumble onto something that works; we just don’t know ahead of time what it will be”). Second, whereas BHAG progress involves bold discontinuous leaps, evolutionary progress usually begins with small incremental steps or mutations, often in the form of quickly seizing unexpected opportunities that eventually grow into major—and often unanticipated—strategic shifts.
- Now consider a company—say, American Express—as analogous to a species. By the early twentieth century, American Express found its traditional freight business under siege. Government regulators eroded the company’s monopolistic rate structure and in 1913 the U.S. Post Office began a competing parcel-post system. Profits fell 50 percent.19 Then in 1918 the U.S. government nationalized all freight express businesses, creating a cataclysmic industry change.20 Most freight companies disappeared as the government snatched away their core business. But for American Express, its experiments in financial and travel services (described earlier) proved to be favorable—albeit unplanned—variations that were better suited to the changed environment than its traditional freight business. These variations were then selected as the path to evolve beyond its traditional—and now obsolete—line of business and on which to base its future prosperity.21
- WE like to describe the evolutionary process as “branching and pruning.” The idea is simple: If you add enough branches to a tree (variation) and intelligently prune the deadwood (selection), then you’ll likely evolve into a collection of healthy branches well positioned to prosper in an ever-changing environment.
- As a Wal-Mart executive described: “We live by the motto, ‘Do it. Fix it. Try it.’ If you try something and it works, you keep it. If it doesn’t work, you fix it or try something else.”27
- Using Wal-Mart as an example, we can rephrase Darwin’s quote at the beginning of the chapter so it might read like this: It might be far more satisfactory to look at well-adapted visionary companies not primarily as the result of brilliant foresight and strategic planning, but largely as consequences of a basic process—namely, try a lot of experiments, seize opportunities, keep those that work well (consistent with the core ideology), and fix or discard those that don’t. Of course, we should be careful about making a wholesale analogy from biology to business. We do not think all visionary company adaptation and progress comes from an undirected evolutionary process. Certainly it would be inaccurate to view corporations as exactly like biological species.
- Jack Welch at General Electric embraced this paradoxical mixture of goals and evolution in a management idea labeled “planful opportunism,” as described by Tichy and Sherman in Control Your Own Destiny or Someone Else Will:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Of course, all companies evolve to some degree. Evolution “happens” whether we purposefully stimulate it or not. The real world is full of chance events that affect the trajectory of life. It happens to individual people. It happens to organizations. It happens to entire economic systems. But—and this is the crucial point—visionary companies more aggressively harness the power of evolution.
- IF well understood and consciously harnessed, evolutionary processes can be a powerful way to stimulate progress. And that’s exactly what the visionary companies have done to a greater degree than the comparison companies.
- Brand of the Tartan—The 3M Story:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Carlton also added two other key criteria for evaluating and selecting ideas—criteria based on 3M’s core ideology. First, for an idea to be selected, it had to be basically new; 3M only wanted to select innovative ideas. Second, it had to meet a demonstrable human need—to solve a real problem. Innovation that didn’t “turn into products and processes that someone somewhere will find useful” would be of no interest to 3M.43
- Indeed, the ubiquitous Post-it notes present just one more example of 3M living according to the philosophy that you often get to where you’re going by stumbling, but you can only stumble if you’re moving. Post-it coinventor Art Fry described: One day in 1974, while I was singing in church choir, I had one of those creative moments. To make it easier to find the songs we were going to sing at each Sunday’s service, I used to mark the places with little slips of paper [but they would flutter out at just the wrong time, leaving me frantic]. I thought, “Gee, if I had a little adhesive on these bookmarks, that would be just the ticket,” so I decided to check into . . . Spence Silver’s adhesive.62 Using the 15 percent rule and following the principle of “experimental doodling,” Spence Silver had invented the aberrant adhesive by just experimenting in the lab—mixing certain chemicals together “just to see what would happen.” He explained: The key to the Post-itTM adhesive was doing the experiment. If I had factored it out beforehand, and thought about it, I wouldn’t have done the experiment. If I had really seriously cracked the books and gone through the literature, I would have stopped. The literature was full of examples that said you can’t do this.63 Reflecting on this somewhat chaotic process, 3M executive Geoffrey Nicholson pointed out that “a lot of the things [that led to the Post-it] were accidental.” But had Art Fry not been in an environment where people were doodling around with weird adhesives on their 15 percent time, he would not have come up with the product. Furthermore, had Fry and Silver been in an environment that discouraged persistence—had 3M forbidden them from continuing to work on their crazy idea when initial market surveys indicated that the product would fail—3M Post-it notes wouldn’t exist as a commercial product.64 And that is precisely the point—indeed, the key point from 3M: ALTHOUGH the invention of the Post-it note might have been somewhat accidental, the creation of the 3M environment that allowed it was anything but an accident.
- The Blind Watchmaker.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Chapter 8 Home-Grown Management
- This is no way detracts from Welch’s immense achievements. He ranks as one of the most effective chief executive officers in American business history. But—and this is the crucial point—so do his predecessors. Welch changed GE. So did his predecessors. Welch outperformed his counterparts at Westinghouse. So did his predecessors. Welch became widely admired by his peers—a “management guru” of his age. So did his predecessors. Welch laid the groundwork for the future prosperity of GE. So did his predecessors. We respect Welch for his remarkable track record. But we respect GE even more for its remarkable track record of continuity in top management excellence over the course of a hundred years.
- Visionary companies develop, promote, and carefully select managerial talent grown from inside the company to a greater degree than the comparison companies. They do this as a key step in preserving their core. Over the period 1806 to 1992, we found evidence that only two visionary companies (11.1 percent) ever hired a chief executive directly from outside the company, compared to thirteen (72.2 percent) of the comparison companies. Of 113 chief executives for which we have data in the visionary companies, only 3.5 percent came directly from outside the company, versus 22.1 percent of 140 CEOs at the comparison companies. In other words, the visionary companies were six times more likely to promote insiders to chief executive than the comparison companies.
- In short, it is not the quality of leadership that most separates the visionary companies from the comparison companies. It is the continuity of quality leadership that matters—continuity that preserves the core. Both the visionary companies and the comparison companies have had excellent top management at certain points in their histories. But the visionary companies have had better management development and succession planning—key parts of a ticking clock. They thereby ensured greater continuity in leadership talent grown from within than the comparison companies in fifteen out of eighteen cases.
- Leadership Continuity Loop
- P&G understood the importance of constantly developing managerial talent so as to never face gaps in succession at any level, and therefore to preserve its core throughout the company. Dun’s Review once commented that “P&G’s program for developing managers is so thoroughgoing and consistent that the company has talent stacked like cordwood—in every job and in every level.”39 All the way to senior management ranks, P&G aims at all times to “have two or three people equally capable of assuming responsibility of the next step up.”40 Deupree’s successor, Neil McElroy, explained: “Our [development] of people who. . . will be the management of the future goes on year after year, in good times and bad. If you don’t do it, X years from now we will have a gap. And we can’t stand a gap.”
- The Disney case illustrates an important point. If you’re involved with an organization that feels it must go outside for a top manager, then look for candidates who are highly compatible with the core ideology. They can be different in managerial style, but they should share the core values at a gut level.
- Simply put, our research leads us to conclude that it is extraordinarily difficult to become and remain a highly visionary company by hiring top management from outside the organization. Equally important, there is absolutely no inconsistency between promoting from within and stimulating significant change. If you’re the chief executive or board member at a large company, you can directly apply the lessons of this chapter. Your company should have management development processes and long-range succession planning in place to ensure a smooth transition from one generation to the next. We urge you to keep in mind how the Walt Disney Company—an American icon—got itself in a terrible fix because Walt neglected to build this vital part of a ticking clock. We urge you to not repeat the mistakes made at Colgate, Zenith, Melville, Ames, R.J. Reynolds, and Burroughs. Do not fall into the trap of thinking that the only way to bring about change and progress at the top is to bring in outsiders, who might dilute or destroy the core. The key is to develop and promote insiders who are highly capable of stimulating healthy change and progress, while preserving the core.
- From the perspective of building a visionary company, the issue is not only how well the company will do during the current generation. The crucial question is, how well will the company perform in the next generation, and the next generation after that, and the next generation after that? All individual leaders eventually die. But a visionary company can tick along for centuries, pursuing its purpose and expressing its core values long beyond the tenure of any individual leader.
- Chapter 9 Good Enough Never Is
- The critical question asked by a visionary company is not “How well are we doing?” or “How can we do well?” or “How well do we have to perform in order to meet the competition?” For these companies, the critical question is “How can we do better tomorrow than we did today?” They institutionalize this question as way of life—a habit of mind and action. Superb execution and performance naturally come to the visionary companies not so much as an end goal, but as the residual result of a never-ending cycle of self-stimulated improvement and investment for the future. There is no ultimate finish line in a highly visionary company. There is no “having made it.” There is no point where they feel they can coast the rest of the way, living off the fruits of their labor. Visionary companies, we learned, attain their extraordinary position not so much because of superior insight or special “secrets” of success, but largely because of the simple fact that they are so terribly demanding of themselves. Becoming and remaining a visionary company requires oodles of plain old-fashioned discipline, hard work, and a visceral revulsion to any tendency toward smug self-satisfaction.
- Our research findings clearly support the concept of continuous improvement, but not as a program or management fad. In a visionary company, it is an institutionalized habit—a disciplined way of life—ingrained into the fabric of the organization and reinforced by tangible mechanisms that create discontent with the status quo. Furthermore, visionary companies apply the concept of self-improvement in a much broader sense than just process improvement. It means long-term investments for the future; it means investment in the development of employees; it means adoption of new ideas and technologies. In short, it means doing everything possible to make the company stronger tomorrow than it is today.
- You’re probably getting the impression that the visionary companies are not exactly comfortable places. And that’s precisely the impression you should be getting. COMFORT is not the objective in a visionary company. Indeed, visionary companies install powerful mechanisms to create discomfort—to obliterate complacency—and thereby stimulate change and improvement before the external world demands it. Like great artists or inventors, visionary companies thrive on discontent. They understand that contentment leads to complacency, which inevitably leads to decline. The problem, of course, is how to avoid complacency—how to remain self-disciplined once a company has attained success or become number one in its field. How can a company keep alive that “fire that burns from within” that impels people to keep pushing, to never be satisfied, and to always search for improvement?
- HP also installed a powerful mechanism called “pay as you go” (a policy against taking out any long-term debt). Sophisticated financial models have shown this policy to be totally irrational—that a company like HP should take out debt in order to maximize its value. But such models fail to account for the powerful internal effect of a no-debt policy: It enforces discipline. By refusing to take on long-term debt in order to fund growth, HP forced itself to learn how to fund its 20-plus percent average annual growth (not to mention its ongoing 10 percent of sales investment in R&D) entirely from within. Such a mechanism may not be considered rational, but it produced a whole company of incredibly disciplined general managers skilled at operating with a level of leanness and efficiency usually only found in small, cash-constrained companies.
- Hewlett-Packard versus Texas Instruments illustrates one of the key differences we saw between the visionary and comparison companies. Visionary companies habitually invest, build, and manage for the long term to a greater degree than the comparison companies in our study. “Long term” at a visionary company does not mean five or ten years; it means multiple decades—fifty years is more like it. Yet, at the same time, they do not let themselves off the hook in the short term.
- Indeed, the discipline of self-improvement stands out as one of the most clear differences between the visionary and comparison companies. Taking into account mechanisms of discomfort and long-term investments for the future, we found that the visionary companies have driven themselves harder for self-improvement in sixteen out of eighteen cases
- If you’re involved in building and managing a company, we urge you to consider the following questions:   • What “mechanisms of discontent” can you create that would obliterate complacency and bring about change and improvement from within, yet are consistent with your core ideology? How can you give these mechanisms sharp teeth? • What are you doing to invest for the future while doing well today? Does your company adopt innovative new methods and technologies before the rest of the industry? • How do you respond to downturns? Does your company continue to build for the long-term even during difficult times? • Do people in your company understand that comfort is not the objective—that life in a visionary company is not supposed to be easy? Does your company reject doing well as an end goal, replacing it with the never-ending discipline of working to do better tomorrow than it did today?
- We see good news and bad news in this chapter. The good news is that one of the key elements of being a visionary company is strikingly simple: Good old-fashioned hard work, dedication to improvement, and continually building for the future will take you a long way. It’s pretty straightforward stuff, easily within the grasp of every manager. The bad news is that creating a visionary company requires huge quantities of good old-fashioned hard work, dedication to improvement, and continually building for the future. There are no shortcuts. There are no magic potions. There are no work-arounds. To build a visionary company, you’ve got to be ready for the long, hard pull. Success is never final. It’s a lesson Howard Johnson never learned.
- Chapter 10 The End of the Beginning
- Later, Hewlett boiled down HP’s guiding principles into what he called the “Four Musts”: The company must attain profitable growth; the company must make its profit through technological contribution; the company must recognize and respect the personal worth of employees and allow them to share in the success of the company; and the company must operate as a responsible citizen of the general community.
- LESSONS OF ALIGNMENT FOR CEOS, MANAGERS, AND ENTREPRENEURS We applaud if you go off-site to discuss your corporate ideology, like Hewlett and Packard did in the 1950s. We encourage you to set lofty ambitions for your company, like George Merck did in the 1930s. We hope you will want to put to paper the guiding vision of your company, like Ford did. But never forget that such steps do not in themselves make a visionary company. You never attain final alignment. You never reach final success. You have to work at it constantly. Here are some guideposts. 1. Paint the Whole Picture You’re probably feeling a bit overwhelmed by all the comprehensive detail about Ford, Merck, and HP. And that in itself is precisely the point! VISIONARY companies do not rely on any one program, strategy, tactic, mechanism, cultural norm, symbolic gesture, or CEO speech to preserve the core and stimulate progress. It’s the whole ball of wax that counts. It’s the remarkable comprehensiveness and consistency over time that counts. It’s the nearly overwhelming set of signals and actions—signals to continually reinforce the core ideology and to stimulate progress—that lead to a visionary company. Taken in isolation, each fact about Ford, Merck, and HP would be trivial, and certainly wouldn’t account for their visionary status. But in the context of hundreds of other facts, they add up to a consistent overall picture. It would be a mistake to conclude that you could implement any single chapter of this book in isolation and have a visionary company. Core ideology alone cannot do it. The drive for progress alone cannot do it. A BHAG alone will not do it. Evolution through autonomy and entrepreneurship by itself will not do it. Home-grown management alone does not make a visionary company, nor a cult-like culture, nor even living the concept that good enough never is. A visionary company is like a great work of art. Think of Michelangelo’s scenes from Genesis on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel or his statue of David. Think of a great and enduring novel, like Huckleberry Finn or Crime and Punishment. Think of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony or Shakespeare’s Henry V. Think of a beautifully designed building, like the masterpieces of Frank Lloyd Wright or Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. You can’t point to any one single item that makes the whole thing work; it’s the entire work—all the pieces working together to create an overall effect—that leads to enduring greatness. And it’s not just the big pieces, but also the itty-bitty details—the turn of phrase, the change in pace at just the right moment, the perfect off-center placement of a window, a subtle expression sculpted into the eyes. As the great architect Mies van der Rohe put it, “God is in the details.” 2. Sweat the Small Stuff People don’t work day-to-day in the “big picture.” They work in the nitty-gritty details of their company and its business. Not that the big picture is irrelevant, but it’s the little things that make a big…
- But as you walk away from reading this book, we hope you will take away four key concepts to guide your thinking for the rest of your managerial career, and to pass on to others. These concepts are:   1. Be a clock builder—an architect—not a time teller. 2. Embrace the “Genius of the AND.” 3. Preserve the core/stimulate progress. 4. Seek consistent alignment.
- Chapter 11 Building the Vision*
- A well-conceived vision consists of two major components—core ideology and an envisioned future. Notice the direct parallel to the fundamental “preserve the core/stimulate progress” dynamic. A good vision builds on the interplay between these two complementary yin-and-yang forces: it defines “what we stand for and why we exist” that does not change (the core ideology) and sets forth “what we aspire to become, to achieve, to create” that will require significant change and progress to attain (the envisioned future).
- CORE IDEOLOGY Core ideology, as we described in Chapter 3, defines the enduring character of an organization—its self-identity that remains consistent through time and transcends product/market life cycles, technological breakthroughs, management fads, and individual leaders. In fact, the most lasting and significant contribution of the architects of visionary companies is the core ideology.
- it is far more important to know who you are than where you are going, for where you are going will certainly change as the world about you changes.
- Core Values Core values are the organization’s essential and enduring tenets—a small set of timeless guiding principles that require no external justification; they have intrinsic value and importance to those inside the organization. Disney’s core values of imagination and wholesomeness stem not from a market requirement, but from an inner belief that imagination and wholesomeness should be nurtured for their own sake.
- The key point is that an enduring great company decides for itself what values it holds to be core, largely independent of the current environment, competitive requirements, or management fads. Clearly, then, there is no universally “right” set of core values. A company need not have customer service as a core value (Sony doesn’t), or respect for the individual (Disney doesn’t), or quality (Wal-Mart doesn’t), or market responsiveness (HP doesn’t), or teamwork (Nordstrom doesn’t). (Of course, these companies might have practices or strategies based around these dimensions.) Again, to emphasize a fundamental finding of our research, the key is not what core values an organization has, but that it has core values.
- The “five whys” can help companies in “mundane” industries frame their work in a more meaningful way.
- One way to get at the purpose that lies beyond just maximizing shareholder wealth is to play the “Random Corporate Serial Killer” game. It works like this: Suppose you could sell the company to an individual who would pay a price that everyone inside and outside the company agrees is more than fair, taking into account a very generous set of assumptions about the expected future cash flows of the company. Suppose further that the individual will guarantee stable employment at the same pay scale for all employees after the purchase, but with no guarantee that those jobs will be in the same industry. Finally, suppose the buyer plans to “kill” the company after the purchase—its products or services will be discontinued, its operations will be shut down, its brand-names will be shelved forever, and so on. The company will utterly and completely cease to exist, wiped completely from the face of the Earth. Would you accept the offer? Why or why not? What would be lost if the company ceased to exist? Why is it important that the company continue to exist, now and in the future? We’ve found this exercise to be very powerful for helping hard-nosed, financially-focused executives to reflect on the deeper reasons for being of their organization.
- As we move into the 21st century, companies will need to draw on the full creative energy and talent of their people. But why should people give this level of commitment and devotion? As Peter Drucker has pointed out, the best and most dedicated people are ultimately volunteers, for they have the opportunity to do something else with their lives. With an increasingly mobile society, cynicism about corporate life, and an expanding entrepreneurial segment of the economy, companies need more than ever to have a clear understanding of their purpose in order to make work meaningful and thereby attract, retain, and motivate outstanding people.
- A very important point: You do not “create” or “set” core ideology. You discover core ideology. It is not derived by looking to the external environment; you get at it by looking inside. It has to be authentic. You can’t fake an ideology. Nor can you just “intellectualize” it. Do not ask, “What core values should we hold?” Ask instead: “What core values do we actually hold?” Core values and purpose must be passionately-held on a gut level or they are not core. Values you think the organization “ought” to have, but that you cannot honestly say that it does have, should not be mixed into the authentic core values.
- Executives often ask, “How do we get people to share our core ideology?” You don’t. You can’t! Instead, the task is to find people who already have a predisposition to share your core values and purpose, attract and retain these people, and let those who aren’t disposed to share your core values go elsewhere.
- Finally, don’t confuse “core ideology” with the concept of “core competence.” Here’s the difference: Core competence is a strategic concept that captures your organization’s capabilities—what you are particularly good at—whereas core ideology captures what you stand for and why you exist. Core competencies should be well aligned with a company’s core ideology—and are often rooted in its core ideology—but are not the same as its ideology.
- Once you’re clear about the core ideology, you should feel free to change absolutely anything that is not part of the core ideology. From then on, anytime someone says something shouldn’t change because “It’s part of our culture” or “We’ve always done it that way” or any of the other excuses for resisting change, remind them of this simple rule: If it’s not core, it’s up for change. Or, the strong version of this rule: If it’s not core, change it! Of course, articulating core ideology is just a starting point. You also must determine what type of progress you want to stimulate, which brings us to the second component of the vision framework.
- Envisioned future—the second primary component of the vision framework—consists of two parts: a ten- to thirty-year “Big Hairy Audacious Goal” and vivid descriptions of what it will be like when the organization achieves the BHAG.
- Vision-level BHAG Although organizations may have many BHAGs at different levels operating all at the same time, vision requires a special type of BHAG—a “vision-level” BHAG that applies to the entire organization and requires ten to thirty years of effort to complete. (See chapter 5 for a full discussion of BHAGs.) Setting the BHAG ten to thirty years into the future requires thinking beyond the current capabilities of the organization and current environmental trends, forces, and conditions. Indeed, inventing such a goal forces an executive team to be visionary, rather than just strategic or tactical. A BHAG should not be a sure bet—perhaps…
- In creating such a vision-level BHAG we suggest thinking about the following four categories: target, common enemy, role model, or internal transformation.   Target BHAGs can be quantitative or qualitative. Examples: • Become a $125 billion company by the year 2000. (Wal-Mart, 1990) • Democratize the automobile. (Ford, early 1900s) • Become the company that most changes the worldwide image of Japanese products as being of poor quality. (Sony, early 1950s) • To become the most powerful, the most serviceable, the most far-reaching world financial institution that has ever been. (City Bank, predecessor to Citicorp, 1915) • Become the dominant player in commercial aircraft, and bring the world into the jet age. (Boeing, 1950)   Common-enemy BHAGs involve focusing on beating a common enemy—a David versus Goliath BHAG. Examples: • Knock off RJR as the number one tobacco company in the world. (Philip Morris, 1950s) • Crush Adidas. (Nike, 1960s) • Yamaha Wo tsubusu! (We will crush, squash, slaughter Yamaha!) (Honda, 1970s)   Role-model BHAGs are particularly effective for up-and-coming organizations with bright prospects. Examples: • Become the Nike of the cycling industry. (Giro Sport Design, 1986) • Become as respected in twenty years as Hewlett-Packard is today. (Watkins-Johnson, 1996) • Become the Harvard of the West. (Stanford University, 1940s)   Internal Transformation BHAGs tend to be effective in old or large organizations in need of internal transformation. Examples: • Become number one or two in every market we serve and revolutionize this company to have the strengths of a big company combined with the leanness and…
- Vivid Descriptions Vivid description, the second component of envisioned future, is a vibrant, engaging, and specific description of what it will be like to achieve the BHAG. Think of it as translating the vision from words into pictures, of…
- Don’t confuse core ideology and envisioned future, as managers often do. In particular, we see managers confuse core purpose and BHAGs, exchanging one for the other, mixing the two together, or failing to articulate both as distinct items. Purpose is the organization’s fundamental reason for existence, which like a star on the horizon can never be reached; it guides and inspires forever. A BHAG, on the other hand, is a specific goal which, like a specific mountain to climb, has a specific time frame and can be achieved. Whereas identifying core ideology is a discovery process, setting the envisioned future is a creative process.
- In contrast, the comparison companies in our research frequently did not achieve their BHAGs, in the cases where they set them. The difference lies not in setting easier goals, as the visionary companies tended to have even more audacious ambitions than the comparison companies. Nor does the difference lie in charismatic visionary leadership, as the visionary companies often achieved their BHAGs without such larger-than-life leaders at the helm. Nor does the difference lie in better strategy, as the visionary companies often realized their goals more by an organic process of “try a lot of stuff and keep what works” than by well-laid strategic plans. Rather, the source of their success lies in building the organization as their primary means of creating the future.
- Keep in mind that this dynamic, not vision or mission statements, is the primary engine of enduring great companies, and that vision simply provides the guiding context for bringing this dynamic to life. With this deeper understanding, we urge a rigorous application of the concepts in this chapter to recast your vision or mission into an effective guiding context for building a visionary company. If you do it right, you shouldn’t have to do it again for at least a decade, and you can get on with the most important work: creating alignment. Creating alignment, which is a key part of our ongoing work to help companies transform themselves into visionary companies, requires two key processes: 1) developing new alignments to preserve the core and stimulate progress, and 2) eliminating misalignments—those that drive the company away from the core ideology and those that impede progress toward the envisioned future. The first process is a creative process, requiring the invention of new mechanisms, processes, and strategies to bring the core values and purpose to life and to stimulate progress toward the envisioned future. In Chapter 7, for example, we describe how 3M has installed multiple mechanisms to preserve its core ideology of innovation and internal entrepreneurship. The second part of alignment is an analytic process, requiring a disciplined analysis of the organization—its processes, structures, and strategies—to uncover misalignments that promote behavior inconsistent with the core ideology or that impede progress. Most managers we’ve worked with fall short in eliminating misalignments. If you state teamwork as a core value, but you compensate primarily on individual performance, then you’ve got to change the compensation structure. If you state innovation as a core value, yet have market share as the dominant strategic objective, then you’ve got to change your strategy. If you want to encourage people to try a lot of stuff and keep what works, then you have to remove penalties for honest mistakes. Keep in mind that this is a never-ending process. When misalignments crop up you’ve got to kill them as quickly as possible. Think of misalignments as cancer cells. It’s best to get in there and cut them out before they spread too far.
- If you go off-site to articulate a vision, then you should come back with at least a half dozen specific, concrete changes to make in your organization to increase alignment. What can you add to the organization to better preserve the core and stimulate progress? And, just as important, what should you obliterate in your organization that’s currently driving you away from the core and/or blocking progress? If you do this right, you will spend only a small percentage of your time articulating the vision. The vast majority of your time will be spent bringing the organization into alignment. Yes, it’s very important to stop and think about vision. But even more important, you have to align the organization to preserve the core ideology and stimulate progress toward the envisioned future, not merely write a statement. Keep in mind that there is a big difference between being an organization with a vision statement and becoming a truly visionary organization. When you have superb alignment, a visitor could drop into your organization from another planet and infer the vision without having to read it on paper. This is the primary work of the clock-builder.
- In Search of Excellence
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Concept of the Corporation (1946),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- The Practice of Management (1954),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Managing for Results
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Organizational Culture and Leadership (1985)
- Corporate Culture and Performance
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Q: YOU STUDIED THE PAST. DO YOU WORRY THAT YOUR FINDINGS MIGHT BECOME OBSOLETE IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY? No. If anything, we believe our findings will apply more in the twenty-first century than in the twentieth. In particular, the essential ideas to come from our work—clock building, the Genius of the AND, preserving the core/stimulating progress, and alignment—will continue to be key concepts long into the future. We cannot easily picture a scenario where they would become obsolete. Take clock building, for example. The concept of focusing on building the characteristics of the organization versus coming up with a great idea or being a great charismatic leader will become even more important. With the accelerating rate of technological change, increasing global competition, and dramatically shorter product life cycles, the life span of any specific idea will continue to decline. No matter how great the idea, it will become obsolete more quickly than at any time in the past. And as for the charismatic leader model, we think the world is heading in exactly the opposite direction. Just look at the twentieth century. Nearly the entire world has moved toward democracy. Democracy is a process. The very essence of democracy is to avoid overdependence on any single leader and put the primary focus on the process. Even Churchill—perhaps the single greatest leader of this century—was secondary to the nation and its processes, kicked out of office at the end of World War II. Hitler, Stalin, Mussolini, Tōjō—these were charismatic leaders who did not understand that they were fundamentally less important than the institutions they served. And even if you don’t buy the analogy between the shift to democracy and the evolution of corporations, the great charismatic leader model has one fundamental flaw that will not ever go away—not now, not in the twenty-first century, not in a thousand years: All leaders die. And to transcend this unchanging reality, the focus must be first and foremost on building the characteristics of the organization. Our key framework concept, preserving the core/stimulating progress, will also become increasingly important in the twenty-first century. Look at the trends of business organization: flatter, more decentralized, more geographically dispersed, greater individual autonomy, more knowledge workers, and so on. More than at any time in the past, companies will not be able to hold themselves together with the traditional methods of control: hierarchy, systems, budgets, and the like. Even going into the office will become less relevant as technology enables people to work from remote sites. The corporate bonding glue will increasingly become ideological. People still have a fundamental human need to belong to something they can feel proud of. They have a fundamental need for guiding values and sense of purpose that gives their life and work meaning. They have a fundamental need for connection with other people, sharing with…
- 3M1 Year founded: 1902 Founder(s): Five Minnesota investors—two railroad operators, a physician, a meat-market operator, and an attorney Location: Crystal Bay, MN Founding Concept: To open and operate a mine to extract corundum as an abrasive to export to grinding-wheel manufacturers. Initial Results: Mining business failed after selling only one ton of material; no further purchasers could be found. Company stumbled along via personal accounts of the investors and saved by a new investor (Louis Ordway), who helped the company shift to sandpaper production in 1905. 3M could not afford to pay its president (Edgar Ober) a salary during his first eleven years.
- American Express3 Year founded: 1850 Founder(s): Henry Wells (age unknown), William Fargo (age unknown), John Butterfield (age unknown) Location: New York, NY Founding Concept: To eliminate “wasteful competition” between three rival companies (Wells & Company; Livingston, Fargo & Company; and Butterfield, Wasson & Company) in the freight express business, the three companies agreed to join forces into one, somewhat monopolistic, company. Initial Results: Immediately profitable and rapidly growing (not surprising with a near monopoly).
- Boeing5 Year founded: 1915 Founder(s): William E. Boeing (age 35) Location: Seattle, WA Founding Concept: From the articles of incorporation: “To be a general manufacturing business ... to manufacture goods, wares, and general merchandise of every kind, especially airplanes and vehicles of aviation ... to operate a flying school and act as a common carrier of passengers and freight by aerial navigation.” Bill Boeing entered the business as an ex-lumber merchant. Initial Results: Bill Boeing’s first airplane (the B&W) failed its Navy tests. Boeing then sold fifty of its second plane (the Model C) to the Navy, but could not extend the contract and the company spiraled downward through 1919–1920. Boeing lost $300,000 in 1920 and kept itself alive through loans from Bill Boeing and making furniture and speedboats.
- Ford9 Year founded: 1903 Founder(s): Henry Ford (age 40) and Alex Malcomson (age unknown) Location: Detroit, MI Founding Concept: To make automobiles based on Henry Ford’s mechanical expertise and, in particular, to capitalize on vertical piston technology. One of 502 firms founded in the United States between 1900 and 1908 to make automobiles. Initial Results: First car, the Model A, proved successful; reached sales of over six hundred units per month by the end of the first year of operations. Introduced five models (A, B, C, F, and K) before introducing the Model T in 1908, which revolutionized the industry and made Ford the number one car maker. Other Comments: Although Ford did not found the company specifically to build the Model T, it appears that he had considered the idea of the mass-production line manufacturing process as early as 1903.
- General Electric11 Year founded: 1892 Founder(s): Thomas Edison (age 45), Elihu Thomson (age 39), Charles Coffin (age 48) Location: New York, NY Founding Concept: Consolidation of Edison General Electric Company (founded in 1878 to develop and commercialize Edison’s electricity and lighting research) and Thomson-Houston Electric Company (founded in 1883 as a conglomerate of electricity-related businesses). Initial Results: Successful first year ($3 million earnings in seven months); financial difficulties and cash shortage in 1893 due to national depression; recovered and grew steadily through the next two decades aided, in part, by evolving to the AC system.
- Hewlett-Packard13 Year founded: 1937 Founder(s): William Hewlett (age 26) and David Packard (age 26) Location: Palo Alto, CA Founding Concept: Initial approach was “strictly opportunistic” within the broadly defined “radio, electronic, and electrical engineering field.” Initial products considered in early years included welding equipment, shock machines for weight reduction, automatic urinal flushers, bowling alley sensors, radio transmitters, public address systems, air-conditioning equipment, clock drives for telescopes, medical equipment, and oscilloscopes. Initial Results: Kept itself alive in the first year via contract engineering jobs and lean operations (in a garage). In 1939, sold a few audio oscilloscopes. First-year sales: just above $5,100 with a profit of $1,300. Moved out of garage in 1940. Seventeen people employed in 1941. World War II boosted employment to 144 people; shrank twenty percent after the war. Sales in 1948: $2.1 million.
- IBM15 Year founded: 1911 (1890 for root companies) Founder(s): Charles Flint (age unknown) Location: New York, NY Founding Concept: Merger of two small companies into a mini-conglomerate of measuring scales, time clocks, and tabulating machines for clerks and accountants (named the “Computing, Tabulating, Recording Company,” or CTR.) Initial Results: Floundered for three years and the board seriously discussed liquidation. In 1914, hired Thomas J. Watson, Sr., who gradually improved the health of the company and turned it into the market leader in tabulating machines by 1930. Other Comments: Changed name to the International Business Machines Corporation in 1925.
- Marriott19 Year founded: 1927 Founder(s): J. Willard Marriott (age 26), Allie Marriott (age 22) Location: Washington, DC Founding Concept: To be in business for themselves. Began with a nine-seat A&W root beer stand. To attract additional business, they added hot food (mostly Mexican) and named the restaurant the Hot Shoppe. Initial Results: Built on sixteen-hour days, the store proved profitable during the first year, with $16,000 gross receipts. By 1929, had expanded to three outlets running twenty-four hours per day. Expanded to Baltimore in 1931. Had eighteen Hot Shoppes by 1940.
- Merck21 Year founded: 1891 Founder(s): George Merck (age 23) Location: New York City, NY Founding Concept: Sales branch for German chemical company, E. Merck. Traces roots back to Merck family apothecary in Darmstadt, Germany, 1668. Initial Results: Solid sales success ($1 million by 1897) of imported chemicals from parent company; didn’t manufacture its own chemicals until its second decade of life. Began manufacturing iodides and other staple pharmaceuticals at new facility in Rahway, New Jersey, in about 1903. Revenue in 1910 $3 million.
- Sony31 Year founded: 1945 Founder(s): Masaru Ibuka (age 37) Location: Tokyo, Japan Founding Concept: No clear idea other than the vague concept to apply technology to the creation of consumer products. Initial Results: Struggled with a failed rice cooker, failed tape recorder system; stayed alive via crude heating pads and then a hodgepodge of products on contract for Japan Broadcasting, such as voltmeters and control consoles for studios. Developed first hit consumer product (pocket radio) in 1955. Took a dozen years to reach five hundred employees.
- Walt Disney35 Year founded: 1923 Founder(s): Walter E. Disney (age 21), Roy O. Disney (age 27) Location: Los Angeles, CA Founding Concept: Walt moved from Kansas City to Los Angeles to get into the movie business, but could not land a job, so he rented a camera, made an animation stand, set up a studio in his uncle’s garage, and decided to go into the animation business for himself. According to Disney biographer Schickel, “He was at least halfway convinced that he was too late, by perhaps six years, to break into animation, but [it] was the only area in which he had any prior experience.” Initial Results: First film series (Alice) provided barely enough cash flow (due to frugal expenses) to keep going. Second product (Oswald the Rabbit, 1927) did better, but lost control of product in bad business arrangement. In 1928, he introduced Micky Mouse.
- Our Story So Far (St. Paul, MN: 3M Company, 1977),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Alden Hatch, American Express 1850–1950 (Garden City, NY: Country Life Press, 1950);
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- American Express: The Unofficial History of the People Who Built the Great Empire (New York: Crown, 1987).
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- E. E. Tauber, Boeing in Peace and War (Enumaclaw, WA: TABA, 1991),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert J. Serling, Legend and Legacy (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Alfred Chandler, Giant Enterprise: Ford, General Motors, and the Automobile Industry (Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1964);
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert Lacey, Ford: The Men and the Machine (New York: Ballantine Books, 1986)
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Lawrence G. Foster, A Company that Cares
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert O’Brian, Marriott: The J. Willard Marriott Story
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Values and Visions: A Merck Century (Rahway, NJ: Merck, 1993),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Nick Lyons, The Sony Vision (New York: Crown, 1976),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Vance Trimble, Sam Walton (New York: Dutton, 1990),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- “The Character of Procter & Gamble,” text of speech by John G. Smale, November 7, 1986.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Stephen J. Gould’s book The Flamingo’s Smile, “Darwin at Sea,” Norton, 1985.)
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Jerry I. Porras, Stream Analysis—A Powerful Way to Diagnose and Manage Organizational Change (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1987).
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Schickel, Richard, The Disney Version (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1968),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Sam Walton with John Huey, Sam Walton: Made in America (New York: Doubleday, 1992),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- The original inspiration for this analogy came from a lecture series on intellectual history and the Newtonian Revolution entitled The Origin of the Modern Mind, taught by Alan Charles Kors, Professor of History, University of Pennsylvania, and captured on audiotape as part of the Superstar Teacher Series from the Teaching Company, Washington, D.C.
- Akio Morita, Made in Japan
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Nick Lyons, The Sony Vision
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Vance Trimble, Sam Walton
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert O’Brien, Marriott: The J Willard Marriott Story
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Values and Visions: A Merck Century (Rahway, NJ: Merck, 1993), 13–15.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Alfred Lief, It Floats: The Story of Procter & Gamble (New
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Harry Mark Petrakis, The Founder’s Touch (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- 1988. 22. Our Story So Far (St. Paul, MN: 3M Company, 1977),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Grover and Lagai, Development of American Industries,
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert Lacey, Ford: The Men and the Machine (New York: Ballantine Books, 1986),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read 
- Leonard S. Reich, The Making of American Industrial Research: Science and Business at GE and Bell, 1876–1926 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Dave Packard, “Industry’s New Challenge: The Management of Creativity,” Western Electronic Manufacturers’ Association, San Diego, 23 September 1964, Courtesy Hewlett-Packard Company Archives.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert J. Serling, Legend and Legacy: The Story of Boeing and Its People
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Harold van B. Cleveland and Thomas F. Huertas, Citibank 1812–1970 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Universtity Press, 1985),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert W. Galvin, The Idea of Ideas (Schaumburg, IL: Motorola University Press, 1991),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- International Directory of Corporate Histories (Chicago: St. James Press, 1988),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- The Disney Studio Story (Hollywood: Walt Disney, 1987),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Biology, by Norman K. Wessells and Janet L. Hopson (New York: Random House, 1988),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Miracle at Philadelphia—The Story of the Constitutional Convention: May to September, 1787, by Catherine Drinker Bowen (Boston: Little, Brown, 1966).
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert L. Shook, Turnaround: The New Ford Motor Company (New York: Prentice-Hall, 1990),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Peter F. Drucker, Concept of the Corporation
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Peter F. Drucker, Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices (New York: Harper & Row, 1985),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Warren Bennis, On Becoming a Leader (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Harry Mark Petrakis, The Founder’s Touch (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert W. Galvin, The Idea of Ideas (Schaumburg, IL: Motorola University Press, 1991).
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Virginia Huck, Brand of the Tartan—The 3M Story (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1955);
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Jon Friedman and John Meechan, House of Cards: Inside the Troubled Empire of American Express
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Peter Grossman, American Express: The Unofficial History.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Henry Ford, II, The Human Environment and Business (New York: Weybright & Talley, 1970);
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Anne Jardin, The First Henry Ford (Colonial Press, 1970);
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Ronald G. Greenwood, Managerial Decentralization: A Study of the General Electric Philosophy (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1974);
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert Conot, Thomas A. Edison—A Streak of Luck (New York: Da Capo Press, 1979);
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- The General Electric Story (Schenectady, NY: Hall of History Foundation, 1981),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Control Your Destiny or Someone Else Will
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Thomas J. Watson, Jr., A Business and Its Beliefs
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- John Taylor, Storming the Magic Kingdom
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Schickel, Richard, The Disney Version
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- In Search of Excellence Video
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- from In Search of Excellence
- Marc Eliot, Walt Disney: Hollywood’s Dark Prince (New York: Birch Lane Press, 1993);
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Joe Fowler, Prince of the Magic Kingdom: Michael Eisner and the Re-Making of Disney (New York: Wiley, 1991);
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert B. Cialdini, Influence
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- 1984); Philip G. Zimbardo and Michael R. Leippe, The Psychology of Attitude Change and Social Influence
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Daniel J. Boorstin, The Americans: The Democratic Experience (New York: Vintage Books, 1974),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Ron Zemke and Dick Schaaf, The Service Edge
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- William Davidow and Bro Utall, Total Customer Service
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert Sobel, IBM: Colossus in Transition (New York: Truman Talley Books, 1981),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- The IBM Way (New York: Harper & Row, 1986),
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- P&G: ‘We Grow our Own Managers,’” Dun’s Review, December 1975,
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- George Plimpton, The Writer’s Chapbook
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Oscar Schisgall, Eyes on Tomorrow: The Evolution of Procter & Gamble
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Robert Slater, The New GE
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- William Manchester, The Last Lion,
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
