# Creating a Culture of Accountability

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: Mark E. Green and Glen Dall

- Regardless of industry, leadership tenure, culture or geography, my coaching colleagues and I routinely observe a lack of accountability as a foundational obstacle to profitable growth and scale in small and middle- market firms. The best strategies and market opportunities in the world mean nothing if you’re not able to execute your plans and get things done. Effective execution starts with crisp accountability, and you cannot scale your business without it.
- Aside from accomplishing more with your current staff, mastering accountability creates an environmental condition that further increases employee ROI: high performers love it and low performers hate it.
- Accountability, like rigor and discipline, is virtual catnip to high- performing employees. They appreciate being held accountable and that others around them—including their leaders—are too. This creates a more predictable meritocracy in which high performers have clear objectives and the opportunity to own their results; it’s a perfect environment in which to shine, stretch, feel challenged and continue to grow. As a result, they’ll be even more productive and want to stay with your firm. What’s more, an environment full of high performers makes it easier to attract, hire and retain other high performers.
- As your top employees realize that the business is picking up momentum by accomplishing more while simultaneously shedding low performers, they will begin to feel an esprit de corps and take on a winning mentality. This is absolutely contagious and will boost the positive energy in your workplace, further accelerating the cycle.
- CHAPTER 1: DEFINING ACCOUNTABILITY
- What is Accountability?   accountable: ac·count·able | adjective Subject to giving an account: answerable Capable of being explained: explainable 1   Most notable is what’s not captured in this definition: the idea of getting something done. The words accountable and accountability evoke the concept of ownership rather than accomplishment. However, the latter is generally implied through the former.
- Part of being accountable—in addition to knowing and communicating the details of what’s going on—includes acting as an early warning system, much like the ‘canary in the coal mine’ did all those years ago. An accountable person anticipates risks in the form of obstacles, problems, and delays and shares them so that the appropriate resources can be deployed to address them before they impact the task or project at hand.
- Being Accountable vs. Doing the Work   Although being accountable for something and actually doing the work are two separate things, quite frequently the same person is tasked with both. This is particularly true for front-line employees. For leaders and managers, accountability is commonly—but not always—separated from the work itself via delegation, similar to the way a project manager completes a project through his or her team. Problems occur when a manager delegates both accountability and doing the work to others without creating the communication channels required for the task owner to identify risks and request resources to keep themselves on track. This “fire and forget” method of assigning work is fraught with risk, prone to failure and demotivating to employees. Proper delegation formally separates tasks associated with accountability from the work itself,
- What Is Accountability: An accountable person not only understands and communicates the details of what’s going on—they also anticipate risks  in the form of obstacles, problems, and delays and share them so that the appropriate resources can be deployed to address them before they impact the task or project at hand.
- Being Accountable vs Doing The Work: Proper delegation formally separates tasks associated with accountability from the work itself.
- CHAPTER 2: SYMPTOMS &  BEHAVIORS
- Persistent, annoying, unresolved problems are the most common indicator of an underlying accountability deficiency. This is closely followed by a lack of progress on projects and new initiatives, and lastly, a culture of blame. These symptoms sound like: “We never seem to get anything done around here.” They feel like: “We’re not moving fast enough!” And they look like business leaders who are unwilling to risk conflict, challenge one another or name the elephants in the room.
- ask the CEO and the executive team one simple, powerful question: “Who is accountable for this (project, initiative, result, etc.)?” My intention is not to assign blame, but rather to have the leadership team acknowledge that a lack of clear accountability is a root cause of their problem!
- The Nine Accountable Behaviors   Maintaining Transparent Communication: You should be willing to communicate openly and honestly about the project and/or results for which you are accountable, regardless of whether the current status is good, bad or ugly. Other components of transparent communication include a ‘no shame, no blame’ attitude and a willingness to speak freely for the good of the project or organization.   Being Anticipatory and Pro-Active: Think multiple steps ahead of where you are rather than just focusing on what’s on your plate right now. This includes contemplating second or third-order effects. For example, it’s not accountable to think about a decision you must make today without considering how that decision will affect outcomes a month or a quarter from now. Every single person involved in the decision-making process should adopt the same mindset, identifying second or third-order effects and putting together plans to address them.   Remaining Results-Oriented: Business leaders—and those accountable for a particular outcome—must be very clear about what they are trying to achieve and include a mechanism to not only identify when they have reached that goal, but also measure progress along the way. When the desired results are clear, nothing is hazy or ambiguous. In addition, the team is focused on outcomes rather than activities; for example, it should be about how many sales the team has closed, not how many calls they’ve made in the process.   Staying Clarity-Driven: You should seek clarity in your quest to maintain accountability. What is the reality of the situation in front of you? To determine that, you must avoid rationalizing, making up stories or accepting ambiguity. Being clarity-driven is all about posing uncomfortable questions, asking for more information, making sure people are on the same page and ultimately reaching a level of detail so granular that the team can’t help but have a universal understanding of progress to date, as well as where you’re headed and how you’ll get there.   Engaging in Disciplined Planning: You should invest a significant amount of time in planning prior to taking action. Why? Thoughtful, thorough planning provides you with the best possible chance of reaching your goals as efficiently as possible. Imagine hiring an excellent painting company to help you switch up the color of your living room. The team would likely spend 60 percent of their time just prepping the room— taping off edges, removing outlet covers, etc.—and 40 percent of it actually painting. But that preparation is the reason why their service is so great. And it’s extremely accountable behavior.   Holding Yourself and Others to High Expectations: The rationale for this one is pretty simple. When you expect more, people tend to rise to the occasion and deliver. The inverse is also true: those who don’t expect much usually get exactly what they bargained for. Be someone who raises the bar, rather than lowers it, and…
- The Nine Non-Accountable Behaviors   Finger Pointing: Those who blame others are simply aiming to shirk their own responsibilities. Finger pointing indicates an external locus of control rather than an internal one. Instead of believing that they’re responsible for a particular outcome—no matter what’s happened along the way—and therefore in control and able to fix it, those who finger point are attempting to throw someone else under the bus. There’s nothing accountable about that.   Withholding Information: You may think you’re being a good manager, but when you don’t divulge enough detail to provide your team with the depth of knowledge necessary to understand the reality of your project’s condition, you’re not being accountable. You’re hindering everyone’s ability to fulfill their part of the bargain. This could sound like: “There’s a small issue, but by next week, we’ll get right back on track,” or, “Don’t worry about it—we’ll get it done.” These phrases obscure the truth, and they’re not at all accountable.   Letting People or Teams ‘Off the Hook’: We’ve already discussed the reality that people typically perform up to your expectations. The reverse is also true: if you continue to let people off the hook by accepting their excuses, you create a culture of mediocrity throughout your organization. It’s a somewhat insidious process as well. When someone tells you they’ll be caught up by next week, and you say, “Great,” rather than asking how they got off track in the first place, you’re setting yourself up for more excuses— and more problems—down the line.   Being Driven By Activity, Rather Than Results: I see this all the time. The pervading model in our society is that busyness is directly tied to achievement, but that’s actually not true. When you focus on what you and your team are doing, rather than what you’ve achieved, you miss the mark. Why? In the end, all that matters is what you’ve actually accomplished. Knowing how much effort the team expended communicates absolutely nothing about real progress.   Putting Actions Before Plans: Like our societal tendency to prioritize busyness over actual results, maintaining a bias toward action isn’t productive either. You must have clarity as to the exact direction in which you’re heading to get the results you’re looking for. Just think about what would happen if that same painting company we discussed came to do your bedroom, cracked the paint cans open right away, and told you that they would just try really hard not to make a mess. Would that be satisfactory to you? If not, jumping into action without a strong plan in place shouldn’t be either.   Failing to Identify Clear Outcomes: We’ll get into this more deeply in chapter 3, but it bears mentioning now. What happens when you don’t take the time to clearly define the parameters of success and make sure everyone is on the same page? Everyone walks away from your meeting with a slightly different idea of what you’re looking for. They begin…
- Diagnosing the Symptoms: Persistent, annoying, unresolved problems are the most common indicator of an underlying accountability deficiency. This is closely followed by a lack of progress on projects and new initiatives, and lastly, a culture of blame.
- Accountable Behaviors: An organization’s symptoms do not occur in a vacuum. Human decisions and behaviors create outcomes, and there are clear, observable differences in the behaviors that lead to accountable versus non-accountable outcomes.
- Non-Accountable Behaviors: Non-accountable behaviors are often passive. Understanding the symptoms and behaviors associated with accountability is a critical first step in observing and acknowledging the reality of why your organization is performing below its potential.
- CHAPTER 3: ACCOUNTABILITY STARTS WITH YOU
- George Washington lead by example, and for good reason. Whether you realize it or not, all eyes and ears within your business are focused on you. What you say and what you do are invisibly and constantly observed, scrutinized and evaluated as your managers and employees look for clues as to how they should behave. The most effective leaders I’ve coached consistently lead by example and walk their own talk.
- Right People, Right Seats   It’s not uncommon for a poor accountability diagnosis to mask the probability that one (or more) members of your management team might not be the right person for their role. That is, they aren’t capable of exhibiting the appropriate leadership and accountability behaviors to pull your business forward. This can be difficult to recognize and acknowledge. There is no end to the justifications you might want to offer as to why everyone on your team is 100 percent right for their role. In my nearly 20 years coaching small and mid-market leadership teams, I’ve heard them all.   Consider These Two Realities: Your emotional attachment to longstanding members of your team interferes with your ability to objectively evaluate their performance and fit.   A whopping 85 percent of the leadership teams I’ve coached had  at least one member turnover within the first twelve months of my engagement because that the person wasn’t the right fit.   If you have a people problem—and the odds are you do—you have to be honest with yourself and make the switch. The wrong people in the wrong seats aren’t capable of helping you improve your organization’s accountability or performance. The best question to ask yourself in this regard is, “Would I enthusiastically rehire every member of my team?” Of course, the key word here is ‘enthusiastically.
- Raise Your Expectations   Now that you’ve considered your people, it’s time to focus on your expectations. People perform to meet them, whatever they are.
- University of California psychologist Robert Rosenthal demonstrated this with an experiment that measured how teacher expectations affected student achievement. At the beginning of an academic year, Rosenthal selected children at random and informed their teachers that they had particularly high potential. Lo and behold, at the end of the school year, those “high- potential” children outperformed their peers. The explanation for their success? The teachers believed they were talented, treated them accordingly, and the students met the expectations.
- You get what you expect, and both you and your people benefit from high expectations. But how do you determine exactly what to expect? Metrics.
- If you want to improve the speed and quality of a particular service you offer, you should establish specific metrics to gauge those factors and identify targets for them. You may determine if you reach or surpass a target for three months in a row, you’ll have achieved that objective. The bottom line here is that until you know where you want to go, you won’t be able to get there. Be specific, make sure those around you are on the same page, and see how those shifts shape your success.
- Leading by Example: The most effective leaders I’ve coached consistently lead by example and walk their own talk. Do you exhibit accountable behaviors yourself? Or do you operate from the non-accountable behavior list some (or most) of the time?
- Raise Your Expectations: People perform to meet your expectations, whatever they are. You get what you expect, and both you and your people benefit from high expectations.
- Use Metrics: Until you know where you want to go, you won’t be able to get there. Be specific, make sure those around you are on the same page, and see how those shifts shape your success.
- CHAPTER 4: ROLE ACCOUNTABILITY
- What is Role Accountability?   Role accountability creates clarity about the responsibilities and results associated with every seat in the business and facilitates better alignment throughout your organization. To be effective, role accountability must start at the top. In an organization, clarity and alignment only flow in one direction: down. The farther away from senior leadership you go, the fuzzier those elements become.
- Role accountability creates clarity about the responsibilities and results associated with every seat in the business and facilitates better alignment throughout your organization. To be effective, role accountability must start at the top. In an organization, clarity and alignment only flow in one direction: down. The farther away from senior leadership you go, the fuzzier those elements become.
- For example, in a business with excellent clarity and alignment among the leaders, I would expect to travel down a couple of layers and find that the staff also has good clarity and alignment. When there’s poor clarity and alignment at the top, by the time you reach the front lines, you’re usually looking at a train wreck.
    - **Note:** Call sign chaos idea of skip level
- most people are wired to think about actions rather than outcomes, to buy into that culture of busyness we discussed earlier. This is an issue particularly because those activities aren’t measurable—at least not in a meaningful way.
- When more than one person is “accountable,” no one is accountable. It’s easy to make assumptions that things will get done, but when there’s not a designated person to account for a particular result, chances are, it’s not going to happen.
- Optimizing Accountability   You can begin with the Optimizing Accountability tool, which helps establish role accountability for the core functions and results within your business.
    - **Tags:** #fup
    - **Note:** .fup look through tool
- Download: www.GravitasImpact.com/Accountability
    - **Tags:** #fup
    - **Note:** .fup
- Accountability Cards   My follow-on assignment for clients who have completed their Optimizing Accountability tool is to create an Accountability Card for each role.
- To create the accountability cards, provide each member of your team with a 3x5 index card. Ask them to write their role at the top of    the card (CFO, head of sales, etc.), and answer the question: “What are the three most important results the company expects you to deliver in exchange for paying your salary?”
- What is Role Accountability? Role accountability creates clarity about the responsibilities and results associated with every seat in the business and facilitates better alignment throughout your organization.
- Optimizing Accountability: You can begin with the Optimizing Accountability tool, which helps establish role accountability for the core functions and results within your business.
- Accountability Cards: Provide each member of your team with a 3x5 index card. Ask them to write their role at the top of the card, and answer the question: “What are the three most important results the company expects you to deliver in exchange for paying your salary?”
- CHAPTER 5: PROCESS ACCOUNTABILITY
- Creating an Accountability Framework   With an understanding of how to define and measure accountability, it’s time to operationalize it. To ensure that everything in your organization, from large annual priorities to single tasks delegated to direct reports, gets done, you must have the right process in place.
- How do you let go while ensuring that others fulfill their part of the bargain, and to your standards? You establish accountability.
- 3 Building Blocks to Delegate with Accountability: Believe In Them. If you don’t believe they can accomplish the task at hand, they won’t either. On the flipside, if you show them you have high expectations—that you know they can meet—those expectations become a self-fulfilling prophecy. The message comes through loud and clear, “I believe in you.”   Give Them the ‘Why.’ Explain why the task you’re assigning matters to the company and to you personally. Letting them know that you have a personal stake in it drives home the importance of what you’re asking them to do.   Pay Attention. After you express how much their progress matters to you, be sure to follow up. Periodic check-ins let them know that you’re watching, with full confidence they’ll achieve the agreed-upon goal. 5
- The Accountability Framework in Action
- Imagine that your organization has announced its intention to integrate Core Values into every aspect of the business. To create accountability for this initiative, you would first explain that you believe everyone in the organization has the capacity to adhere to each of the company’s Core Values. It may sound simplistic to you, but to your employees—people who may literally wonder whether they will have a job after your announcement—it’s not simplistic at all. They need reassurances that you believe they can do it. I see CEOs miss this step all the time, which unproductively raises the collective blood pressure of the organization. Your role is to inspire them, not add to their stress.
- Next, you have to explain to the organization exactly why you’re doing this, and why it matters to you personally.
- In the process, you have developed a deep understanding of the importance of implementing company-wide Core Values, but the rest of the organization has not! All too often, we unconsciously assume that everyone out there has the same information we do. In most cases, they don’t.
- You must explain why you’ve decided to roll out this particular initiative, including what’s at stake for you personally and how adopting Core Values benefits everyone in the organization.
- Finally, you must demonstrate that you’re watching. This is another common point of failure.
- have my clients incorporate telling Core Value stories into their daily huddles.
- Rules to Cultivate Results
- In addition to the accountability framework, there are several rules that will help you stay on track.
- You’ll remember the first rule from a previous chapter, but it bears repeating: only one person can be accountable for any particular thing.
- When more than one person is accountable, no one is.
- Who is accountable? Who are the team members that will provide support, and what are their roles in bringing the project to completion?
- Why does this matter? It’s crucial for the people accountable for a particular assignment, those supporting them, and the rest of the organization to understand why it matters. In answering the why, you have to be careful to go deep enough that there is real meaning behind it.
- What are the clear outcomes or impact of the project, and how will you measure them? My favorite four words when working with a team in planning mode are, “as measured by what?” Make them your favorite too.
- When are you going to achieve the outcomes? The answer to this one may be rather straightforward. If you’re talking about a quarterly priority, you’re aiming to finish it by the end of the quarter. But making sure everyone understands the target date explicitly and is on board to complete the project accordingly reinforces accountability.
- The next rule is all about transparency. To ensure process accountability, the team must agree to be completely transparent with one another about everything related to what you’re trying to achieve— the good, the bad and the ugly.
- To get your employees to willingly, proactively and transparently communicate about factors that might impinge on a desired outcome, you must actively cultivate and reinforce an attitude of openness to all information.
- In addition to transparency, you have to prioritize communication.
- Put a communication rhythm in place for each major initiative. This should be separate from the communication rhythms the organization already runs: daily huddles, and weekly, monthly and quarterly meetings.
- What’s important is to create a regular checkpoint to complete the knowing-communicating loop.
- The last rule is to adopt a course-correction mentality.
- You’re much better off making continual, small course corrections to a project or behavior than you are making fewer, larger changes later on.
- I often see CEOs trip on the same trouble spots. One of the most common issues? They don’t assign a single person to be accountable; instead they give the project to the team. To avoid this mistake, clearly designate the person who will be accountable and inform the team.
- Another issue tends to arise with the why. Leaders simply don’t provide a detailed enough explanation of the reasons behind the work.
- Additionally, they often fail to define the outcome well enough, which is a real problem. Recalling the Cheshire Cat’s point from chapter 3: without a clear sense of the destination, it’s impossible to get your team there.
    - **Note:** Chesire cat, clarity of intent from Call Sign Chaos
- With increased context and clarity comes better results.
- Creating an Accountability Framework: To ensure that everything in your organization, from large annual priorities to single tasks delegated to direct reports—and everything in between—gets done, you must have the right process in place.
- The Accountability Framework in Action: When the building blocks of accountability are in place, your team will have the clarity and reinforcement to know that you mean business and will do their best to meet your expectations.
- Rules to Cultivate Results: Who is accountable? Why does this matter? What are the clear outcomes or impact of the project, and how will you measure them? When are you going to achieve the outcomes?
- Priority Planning Tool: A simple, practical, actionable tool to make it easy to implement role accountability.
- CHAPTER 6: ACCELERATING ACCOUNTABILITY
- The Upward Spiral of Momentum and Growth
- This model captures all three of the essential elements required to continually improve the accountability and capability of your people.
- First, if you don’t start with the right people in the right seats, which we discussed in the previous chapter, you might as well stop everything else.
    - **Note:** Ref jim collins
- Next, you must use the framework and rules we’ve introduced to create clear accountability.
- Once that is established, you can coach for course-correction and learning so that your people become an even more capable fit for their seats. That, in turn, improves their ability to be accountable, which elevates the level of coaching they require to grow more, and so on.
- A note on coaching: it’s important to coach for growth rather than for results.
- When you coach your people, have them look at the patterns that hold them back. What could they have done differently? This is far more effective to increase capability than solving the problem for them just to get the work done.
- Deliberate Practice
- Unless you’re scaling a psychology practice or a training and development firm, you’re probably not in the business of behavior change—and yet, you must be.
- It’s your job to help them change, and that’s not necessarily easy.
- Leading behavioral change—like my client’s journey up the spiral— is inherently challenging.
- How do you cultivate progress toward change in yourself? Deliberate practice—a concept identified by psychologists K. Anders Ericsson, Ralf Krampe, and Clemens Tesch-Römer. They studied how those at the very top of their field got there and what dictated their success. The researchers found that it wasn’t innate talent. Rather, it was what they labeled deliberate practice, or “effortful activity designed to optimize improvement.” That effortful activity helped the experts they studied…grow into experts.6
- Deliberate practice will help you advance up the spiral in terms of your ability to be accountable and to hold others to the same high standard. To get started, first pick the accountable behavior from chapter 2 that you most want to improve. Next, ask a member of your team or a trusted peer to provide you with feedback on how you’re doing. Then begin practicing.
- Three Key Elements to Deliberate Practice: Motivation to stretch one’s capabilities.   Extreme repetition.   Flow of feedback.
- In his book What Got You Here Won’t Get You There: How Successful People Become Even More Successful, Marshall Goldsmith introduces the concept of ‘feedforward.’ Feedforward is an easy-to-implement process to solicit ideas about how to accomplish something.
- The Upward Spiral of Momentum and Growth: This model captures all three of the essential elements required to continually improve the accountability and capability of your people. The spiral continues upward, fueling itself and building momentum.
- Deliberate Practice: Deliberate practice will help you advance up the spiral in terms of your ability to be accountable and to hold others to the same high standard.
- Accountability in Action: Regardless of what you’ve achieved in the past or where you’re heading in the future, increasing accountable behaviors in yourself and your team will accelerate the achievement of your goals.
- Maxwell, John C. The 5 Levels of Leadership: Proven Steps to Mazimize your Potential.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Rosenthal, Robert and Jacobson, Lenore. “Teacher Expectations for the Disadvantaged,”
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Green, Mark E. Activators – A CEO’s Guide to Clearer Thinking and Getting Things Done.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- K. Anders Ericsson, Ralf Krampe, and Clemens Tesch-Römer, “The Role of Deliberate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert Performance,” Psychological Review,
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Topgrading, Bradford Smart:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- WHO, Geoff Smart and Randy Street:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Measure What Matters, John Doerr:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- The 3x5 Coach, Dave Baney:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Activators, Mark E. Green:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- What Got You Here Won’t Get You There, Marshall Goldsmith:
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
