# Extend Your Mind

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: Tiago Forte

- The Inner Game of Work: Focus, Desire, and Working Free
- I started looking for opportunities to be coached in every area possible. I joined a Crossfit gym, committing to the smallest class available so I could get as much individual attention from the coach as possible. I hired a voice and speech coach, to help me with some bad habits I’d picked up over the years. And I joined a 3-month holistic health coaching program, combining Chinese medicine, reiki, feng-shui, and acupuncture (I know, I know, so California). What I’ve found has been remarkable: a new level of performance and enjoyment, far in excess of the investment I’ve put in. I’ve tried to shift as much of my consumption (of products, services, and information alike) as possible to coaching and accountability groups. This shift has convinced me that the fundamental bottleneck in nearly every area of my life is not knowledge, but accountability.
- The Inner Game of Tennis. In that book, he lays out a simple but powerful new framework for not only coaching, but also teaching and learning.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Gallwey’s approach to coaching is very different: to calm Self 1 using focus, so that Self 2 (the intuitive, embodied self) can come to the forefront and take control. He doesn’t give “instruction” — he shapes the student’s awareness. He might ask them to pay attention to the stitches on the tennis ball as it flies through the air, or pay attention to the exact moment when the racket hits the ball, without trying to actively correct it. With Self 1 thus fully occupied, Self 2 is free to emerge.
- The Inner Game of Tennis revolutionized the coaching of tennis, golf, and other sports, and is well known throughout the world. But Gallwey later elaborated his method into a framework for all kinds of learning and performance, using a key insight: We learn faster when we pay attention and see the world for what it truly is, not for what it should have been. Self 1 is just as present in our work, micromanaging every little thing we do, as in sports. Self 1 introduces distortion into every action we take, which leads to a distorted response, which confirms the original distortion. Traditional productivity advice focuses on behavior — the worker’s response — without ever dealing with the root problem: the original distortion in perception.
- Letting go of Self 1 and exercising trust in Self 2 feels like you are losing control, but in fact you are gaining control by letting go of an inferior means of control.
- The role of the coach is not to provide content, solutions, or advice. It’s not to help, fix, or answer. The coach’s job is to hold up a mirror to the client’s own thinking, including how their attention is focused and how they define the key elements of the situation. The client can just start thinking aloud, allowing the coach to “eavesdrop” on the conversation. That is why the conversation can move quickly — the client is relieved from having to brief and then update their coach on all aspects of the situation, and much more importantly, it doesn’t invite a shifting of the responsibility from client to coach. More specifically, the coach leads the learner through three conversations in sequence: Conversation for…
- The Conversation for Awareness This first conversation is meant to answer the question: “What’s happening?” It invites the following types of question: What stands out? What do you notice when you look at x? How do you feel about this situation? What do you understand about x? What don’t you understand? How would you frame the underlying problem? How would you define the task? What are the critical variables in this situation? How do they relate to one another? What are the anticipated consequences of x? What standards and timeframe have you accepted in this task?…
- The Conversation for Choice The primary purpose of this conversation is to remind the client that they have mobility , which Gallwey defines in this context as reminding them that they “have the capability of choice and can move in the direction of their desired ends at any time.” If Awareness is about “what’s happening,” then Choice seeks to answer “What do I want?”, using the following kinds of questions: What do you really want? What do you want to achieve? What are the benefits of x? What would be the costs of not pursuing x? What would it look like in y weeks, months, years, from now? What don’t you like about those ends? What would be a fulfilling means of getting there? What changes would you like to make? What do you feel most strongly about in this situation? Who or what are you doing this for? How does this fit in with your current priorities? Do you have any conflicts about this course of action? What would success in this endeavor mean to you? What alternative possibilities can you consider? And the most common one: Why would you want to do that? The coach’s job in this…
- The Conversation for Trust The most important outcome in coaching is that the client ends up feeling respected, valuable, and capable of moving forward. At every turn, the coach seeks to avoid undermining the trust they have in themselves by inappropriately becoming an answer-giver, problem-solver, or judge. These are some of the questions that can be used: If you could do it any way you wanted, how would you go about accomplishing this task? When have you succeeded in a challenge similar to this one? At your best, what qualities, attributes, capabilities, do you bring to the situation? Direct acknowledgment by the coach of some of the above Where could you find the help you need to accomplish this task? What’s the most difficult aspect of this task? What is your understanding of this situation? What first steps do you see? How comfortable (confident) do you feel about doing x? What would it take to make you feel more comfortable? What did you like most about the way you accomplished this task? Since trust in oneself is natural in children, the goal of this conversation is to help the client “unlearn” the doubts,…
- Focus At the very heart of the “inner game” approach is focus. It is only when we are giving our full attention to something that we can bring all our resources to bear effectively. Why? Because it is only when we are giving full attention, that self-interference (embodied in Self 1) is minimized. We don’t minimize self-interference so we can then focus; we focus so we can minimize self-interference. In the fullness of focus, there is no room for Self 1’s neurotic fears and doubts. Focus is easier to sustain when you are doing something you’ve freely chosen to do. In this sense, focus is not just a…
- Desire What is rarely appreciated about focus is that it is…
- In our pursuit of focus, then, our choice is over which desires to nourish, and which to starve. Nourishing the desires of Self 2 builds stability and self-fulfillment. Nourishing Self 1 desires…
- Here’s what makes it difficult: if you use Self 1 to control Self 1, you strengthen the very taskmaster that is causing the conflict. Self 1 has the upper hand any time it convinces you either that you need its advice, OR that you need to fight it into submission. In either case, it succeeds at its goal: to stay in control. If instead you acknowledge Self 2 and its perfectly natural desires, you can reach for it and give it whatever attention you have at your disposal. A…
- But accessing one’s true desires is also not easy. Often people won’t allow themselves to get in touch with what they truly want unless they already see the means of achieving it. Or their desires are colored or completely dominated by the desires of others for them.…
- Here are some useful questions for identifying desires: How clear are you about what you want? What do you really want? How connected do you feel to your passion, to the wellspring of your desire? Have you ever felt more connected? When, and to what? As you look at your different desires, do they seem to be aligned or to be pulling in separate directions? Where do your desires come from — thought or feeling? How clearly can you distinguish your desires from the expectations of other people? To what extent do you feel you are “steering” your…
- Most of us were brought up with the idea that our desires are fundamentally untrustworthy. Ideals are trustworthy. Reason is trustworthy. Desires are suspicious, because they pull us away from our ideals. Of course, no one ever explained where we were supposed to get the desire to pursue the ideals. The implied motivation, of course, was fear — fear of not being accepted, fear of not being successful, fear of not surviving. All our ideologies, from conservative to liberal, religious to atheist, are in agreement: human nature is bad and needs to be controlled from the outside. These external, fear-based methods of control are internalized…
- Masters of Creative Note-Taking: Luhmann and Da Vinci
- It is distinct from simply writing things down. For our purposes, note-taking is: Personal, informal, quick and dirty: notes are optimized not for public consumption, but for your own personal use, like a leather notebook you keep in your backpack Open-ended and never finished: “taking notes” is a continuous and generative process, in which you can noodle on ideas without an explicit purpose in mind Low friction: notes impose low standards for quality and polish, which means they are easy to add to, subtract from, and edit, and can be messy, incomplete, or totally random Multimedia: just like a paper notebook might contain drawings and sketches, quotes and ideas, and even a pasted photo or post-it note, notes naturally combine diverse types of media in one place
- What further distinguishes creative note-taking from the general purpose kind is that such notes are not meant for a one-time project. They are meant for a lifetime of continuous, open-ended learning and creative output.
- There are hidden gems in our notes Even though he was celebrated as a genius during his lifetime, it took centuries for us to fully appreciate Leonardo’s brilliance.
- Notes are a means to an end It is very tempting to make notes into ritualistic totems. To obsess over the grain of the paper, the thickness of the pencil, or the default spacing and font. All of this takes away from the act of creation. Leonardo’s notes were so chaotic and messy they border on being unintelligible, even for him. He understood that it was the final product — The Last Supper, or the Mona Lisa — that would truly make a mark. All the notes created along the way paled in comparison.
- Notes deserve respect Despite the above, notes are also worthy of our respect. It is only when we start treating our ideas as worth capturing and reviewing, that we start to have more good ideas in the first place.
