# How to Go Vegan

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: Veganuary

- In a way veganism is not such a radical change; it can be more like a return to self and simply aligning your practices with your principles. Most of us are not brought up or socially conditioned to choose the vegan option, and yet most of us would agree we want to live a life that doesn’t cause unnecessary suffering to other living beings. Going vegan, I felt like I was becoming more myself and very quickly felt more comfortable in my skin. It’s exciting to uncover another piece of your identity, liberating in fact.
- But while recognising that I was against animal cruelty in any form was one thing, actually becoming vegan took some time, patience, research and, most of all, community with other vegans. I read Eating Animals by Jonathan Safran Foer and felt thoroughly well-versed in the reasons why I was now vegan, and riled up to revamp my whole life. But I forgot to account for the fact that I was unlearning two decades’ worth of living a completely different lifestyle, and that there was a method to making going vegan easier. I quickly learned that going vegan required compassion for myself as much as for the animals and I urge you to be gentle with yourself as you work towards integrating veganism seamlessly into your life.
- One thing I’d like to imprint on your brain is that veganism is not about being perfect. And it isn’t about rules and restrictions; it is about living with compassion and mindfulness – for animals, for yourself, for other humans, for our planet. You will struggle, you may make mistakes, you might feel like you’re being awkward, but you’ll learn that there’s no such thing as a perfect vegan.
- The best piece of advice I got as a new vegan was to introduce delicious new vegan foods to my diet before cutting things out – to make my vegan life feel joyful and abundant – and I believe that is the way to make it sustainable.
- INTRODUCTION
- They may call themselves ‘vegan’ or ‘plant-based’, or they may not choose a label at all, but the number of people who avoid meat, milk and eggs is rising exponentially, and this is happening all around the world.
- Perhaps you’re already vegan, vegetarian or v-curious, or you’ve tried being vegan and fallen off the wagon. Maybe you have friends and family who are vegan or interested in giving it a go. This book is for you. We don’t ask for perfection, or for you to make yourself miserable by putting too much pressure on yourself. It’s OK to make mistakes and have the odd slip-up. Most vegans did exactly the same when they started out, too.
- WHY TRY VEGAN?
- Each year, people who take part in Veganuary are asked how they found their month of plant-based eating and what physical changes they experienced during that time. Among the most common responses are: my skin cleared up; my digestion is a whole lot better; my sinuses are clearer; my nails are stronger; I have more energy.
- We regularly hear that eczema, psoriasis and acne improve or clear up, and those who suffer irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) often report that the symptoms decrease in severity or disappear altogether.
- Sporty people often find that being vegan helps them recover from training quicker, and that allows them to train even harder and achieve more impressive results. Others are just amazed that they are able to effectively build muscle and endurance on a plant-based diet.
- What is really interesting is the number of people who report better mental clarity, increased concentration and a levelling out of moods. Some participants tell us that their depression symptoms were relieved.
- ‘Most deaths in the United States are preventable, and they are related to what we eat.’ Dr Michael Greger, author of How Not to Die
- Heart disease is the number one cause of death worldwide,1 and lifestyle factors play a big part. We know, of course, that smoking is bad, that exercise is good and that we should limit alcohol intake and stress. But what about diet? Research shows that putting plants at the centre of our meals can reduce many of the risk factors for heart disease, including high cholesterol levels, high blood pressure, being overweight and developing type 2 diabetes.
- Elevated blood cholesterol is one risk factor for heart disease. Of meat-eaters, fish-eaters, vegetarians and vegans, vegans have the lowest levels of cholesterol. Animal products contain cholesterol, whereas plant products don’t.
- In 2015, World Health Organisation scientists felt they had amassed enough evidence from decades of work to state categorically that processed red meat causes cancer, while red meat is a ‘probable’ cause.17 This means that bacon, sausages, hot dogs, ham, salami and pepperoni are now officially classified as carcinogens, just as tobacco is.
- It’s not just the meat itself but how it’s cooked that can cause trouble. Whenever meat – including beef, chicken and fish – is cooked at high temperatures, chemicals called heterocyclic amines (HCAs) form, and these are also carcinogenic.21 The longer meat is cooked, the more HCAs form, and this may explain why eating well-done meat is associated with increased risk of breast, colon, oesophagus, lung, pancreatic, prostate and stomach cancer.
- HOW TO GO VEGAN
- This is the big question – how exactly do we make this change in our lives? Since most of us were brought up eating meat, milk and eggs, it’s natural to wonder about what we’ll miss when leaving these products behind. But going vegan doesn’t have to feel like a huge sacrifice. In fact, it really should not feel anything like that at all!
- Before we get started, a brief word of advice about putting pressure on yourself: please don’t. If you’re keen to try veganism but find you fall off the wagon, don’t assume that veganism is not for you. You just made a mistake. That’s OK, we’re all human. Just start again. Every day you eat plant-based is a wonderful thing, so don’t worry too much about the odd hiccup.
- Our advice in those first few days is not to get too radical.
- Whatever you do, please don’t give up just because you don’t know whether your favourite sandwich pickle is vegan. (By the way, it probably is.)
- We won’t lie to you. In the first fortnight of being vegan, you are going to read a LOT of food labels and your weekly shop is likely to take just that little bit longer. When you start to look at ingredients, you may be shocked to find you have no idea what half of them are, or why you are eating them. I mean, what is ‘casein’ and what’s it doing in my cracker, and what do you mean I’ve been eating crushed beetles?
- If you’re not a fan of reading labels (believe us, some people are!) or are short on time, you can use an app such as Spoon Guru to check products – set your dietary requirement and get scanning to find out what is safe.
- The simplest way to begin your vegan adventure is to stick to your favourite, tried-and-tested recipes and veganise them by making simple substitutions.
- If you want to try veganism but are faced with opposition at home, we’d suggest you talk it through as calmly as possible to find out what the reasons are.
- From fast food cafes to raw food restaurants to gourmet plant-based dining, you’ll find your best local options at Vanilla-Bean.com or HappyCow.net. These websites, and their apps, list thousands of restaurants, cafes and health food stores all over the world, and are updated regularly.
- The great thing about trying vegan for a month is that it helps others around you accept the new diet, too. If you say that you’re just trying it for a month to see how it feels, people will understand much more readily than if you just told them out of the blue that this former meat addict has gone vegan. That’s when the questions will be fired at you in a rapid volley. But telling them that you’re just trying it for a few weeks will probably elicit no more than an OK,
- Besides, in our experience, those that laugh loudest are often the most interested. Give them a little space to ask the questions they are probably bursting to know and see how many of them in time follow your lead.
- The people in your life will be much more responsive to the benefits of eating plant-based foods when you’re calm and rational, not when you’re parked outside their house with a banner and a megaphone. Hot-headed arguments rarely end in anyone changing their views.
- Most of us have eaten something we think is vegan but we can’t be sure. It’s not about perfection. It’s about doing our best.
- You can get all the nutrients you need on a vegan diet – but you should be aware that with so many plant-based products out there, is it also possible to be a junk food vegan.
- Green vegetables (the superstars are kale, broccoli, seaweed and peas), beans and pulses (lentils, lima, edamame, pinto and black), grains (rice, pasta, quinoa and bulgur) and nuts (Brazils, peanuts, cashews, almonds, pistachios, pine nuts and walnuts) are all excellent sources of protein.
- For an active man of similar age, the requirement is 56g.
- These are the protein levels in some everyday vegan meals: BREAKFAST Peanut butter on toast (2 pieces) 15g Typical cereal with soya yoghurt and a handful of nuts 13g Porridge/oatmeal with a sprinkle of almonds or seeds 12g LUNCH Three-bean salad wrap (2 wraps) 18g Beans on toast (2 pieces) 17g Hummus and falafel wrap (3 falafels, one wrap) 15g DINNER Tofu and vegetable stir-fry with brown rice 32g Veggie sausages1 (2), potato and peas 26g Shepherd’s pie, made with soya mince 20g
- Other great protein-rich vegan foods to look out for are seitan, which has an incredible 30g of protein per serving, tempeh, quinoa and cashew or almond nut butters.
- You can boost your intake with beans (especially black turtle beans, kidney beans and soya beans), kale, collards, watercress, okra, broccoli, sweet potato and butternut squash. (Spinach has loads of calcium but it’s poorly absorbed due to the oxalic acid in the leaves.) You can also snack on dried figs and almonds, and include some tofu in your meals.
- You may also consider a supplement. This is wise for everyone, no matter their diet, because a lack of Vitamin D is surprisingly common, and can affect muscles and mood as well.
- The good news is that women who eat a plant-based diet do not appear to be any more at risk of iron deficiency than those who eat meat, and there is no reason why any vegan should struggle to get enough iron so long as their diet is healthy and balanced.
- Two little tips to help boost iron absorption: eat foods that contain Vitamin C and don’t drink coffee or tea (either black or green) with a meal.
- Now, while getting the right amount of iron is obviously good, ingesting too much iron is actually pretty bad. Luckily, our bodies are great at regulating iron – if we don’t have enough circulating around our bodies, our intestines take more of it from our food. If there’s too much, they take less. Interestingly, research suggests that our clever intestines can only do this effectively with iron from plants. Iron from meat can’t be regulated so easily, and researchers are starting to raise questions about whether too much iron from meat is linked to cancer and cardiovascular disease7
- Fats are our friends. We need fatty acids to ensure the proper functioning of all our tissues, so it’s great news that our bodies are able to make almost all the fatty acids we need. There are two, however, that we cannot make and therefore it’s absolutely essential that we eat them. For this reason they are called ‘essential’ fatty acids. They’re known as omega-3 and omega-6.
- Omega-6 can be found plentifully in leafy vegetables, seeds, nuts, grains and most vegetable oils. It is very easy to get sufficient omega-6 on a balanced diet
- Small amounts can be found in nuts, seeds, soya products, beans, vegetables and whole grains but the best sources of omega-3 are: Leafy vegetables, such as Brussels sprouts, kale, spinach and salad leaves Walnuts Rapeseed oil Ground flaxseed9 Flaxseed oil Soybeans and tofu10 Black lentils, also known as urad dal and mungo beans (not to be confused with mung beans)11
- Ground flaxseed? Have you ever heard anything more stereotypically vegan in all your life?! Don’t despair. These ground-up seeds are quite common, and can be found in most supermarkets and health food shops. Add them to smoothies or muffin recipes or sprinkle them on your breakfast cereal and you won’t even notice that you’re getting a massive health boost.
- If you’re worried about getting enough omega-3, physician and author Dr Michael Greger recommends taking 250mg of pollutant-free long-chain omega-3s in the form of supplements, two or three times per week. These are obtained from algae – the same place that fish get their omega-3 from! Vegan versions of these supplements are widely available.
- Since vegans don’t want to eat the animals – or their delicious bacteria – we can get B12 by instead eating yeast extracts, nutritional yeast flakes and breakfast cereals and plant-based milks that are fortified with it.
- The more we spread out our intake, the less we need to consume, so try to eat three portions a day of B12-fortified foods.
- Most vegans take some form of supplement just to be sure.
- Dr Greger’s Daily Dozen
    - **Tags:** #fup
    - **Note:** .fup download this ap
- The average British meat-eater consumes more than 11,000 animals in their lifetime1
- Not only are we sparing the lives of animals, we’re shrinking our food-related carbon emissions by half.2
- The person who tells you this has not yet worked out that meat and protein are not the same thing, nor have they realised that protein is found in almost everything we eat.
- A third misconception is how much protein we need. In Western Europe and the US, protein consumption is significantly higher than the recommended intakes3 and this could be linked to health problems too,
- visit www.plantbuilt.com and www.greatveganathletes.com, and check out the physiques of the vegan bodybuilders, weightlifters and powerlifters. Look on in awe.
    - **Tags:** #fup
    - **Note:** .fup
- For more information on protein requirements, see here
    - **Tags:** #fup
    - **Note:** .fup
- Often what people mean by this is: Haven’t we always done it? And Don’t we have all the right biological equipment to eat meat? And the answers to those questions are no and not really.
- We do know that humans were predominantly gatherers like other apes, only scavenging meat that true carnivores left behind. Take a look at our hands and teeth, which are useless for ripping flesh, and our lack of speed, which would see even a lame antelope outrun us. These things are not a problem for true carnivores, like jaguars and tigers. The canine teeth people cite as ‘proof’ that we should eat meat look nothing like the canines of carnivores and are misnamed.
- Obviously, we can tolerate a bit of meat in our diet, but our bodies have never really adapted to it. Our intestines are long, and look more like those belonging to our herbivorous friends than to our carnivorous ones. Carnivores have short intestines as they need to move meat out of their system quickly before it putrefies and kills them.
- Food poisoning in people is still predominantly caused by animal products and meat continues to harm the human body in many other ways, including through higher rates of heart disease, some cancers and diabetes.
- 5. You’ll feel weak or ill   Vegan food is nutritious and the vast majority of people who take part in Veganuary say they feel better as a result of going without animal products.
- For most people, switching to a vegan diet feels great in the short term, but crucially it also reduces their risks over the long term from diseases like cancer, heart disease and diabetes.
- It’s entirely possible to be a junk food vegan these days, with so many convenience foods out there. If you fail to eat good, wholesome, nutritious foods, you’re more likely to feel under the weather, and that’s true whatever your diet.
- All the nutrients you need can be found in a well-planned vegan diet. So if you find you’re falling short of, say, enough iron, then make sure you include plenty of whole grains, beans, peas, nut butters and green leafy vegetables in your diet.
- We should realise, too, that it takes a little time for a good diet to undo the damage of a poor one.
- Formula One driver Lewis Hamilton is vegan, as is heavyweight boxer David Haye. World champion tennis player Novak Djokovic is so taken with plant-based foods that he has opened his own vegan restaurant, while tennis champions Serena and Venus Williams also tout the benefits of eating plant-based while in training.
- Do you like a little more contact in your sport but worry that going vegan will somehow make you soft? We dare you to put that proposition to mixed martial art champion Mac Danzig, European jiu-jitsu champion Emilia Tuukkanen or Austrian champion boxer Melanie Fraunschiel. All 100 per cent vegan, all 100 per cent badass.
- 7. We need meat to be healthy   Quite the opposite. A plant-based diet cuts the risk of developing heart disease, type 2 diabetes and some kinds of cancers. Vegans typically have lower cholesterol levels, lower blood pressure and a healthier Body Mass Index than meat-eaters. And those who choose plant proteins over animal proteins live longer, too.
- Processed red meat has now been classified as a Group 1 carcinogen,8 putting it in the same category as smoking and asbestos. Meat is said to be ‘processed’ if it has undergone salting, curing, smoking, fermentation or any other process to enhance its flavour or improve its preservation.
- The evidence is clear: these processed red meats can cause bowel cancer; and there’s some evidence that connects them to stomach and pancreatic cancers, too.9
- Unprocessed red meat has been classified as Group 2A, which means it is ‘probably carcinogenic to humans’10 . There are clear associations between eating red meat and developing bowel cancer,11 and there is also evidence of links to prostate cancer.12
- In the UK, three-quarters of chicken carcasses are contaminated with campylobacter, which can cause diarrhoea, cramping, abdominal pains, vomiting and fever.
- 8. It’s impossible to give up cheese   Often when someone is struggling to become vegan, cheese is the thing that holds them back. It’s almost as if that stuff was addictive! In fact, researchers have found that the casein in cheese can trigger the brain’s opioid receptors, which produces a feeling of euphoria. This may explain in part why cheese often seems to be the thing that new vegans miss the most.
- Don’t restrict yourself to what’s available in your local shops; there are many more you can order online, and you’ll be sure to find some that suit your tastes. Of course, they won’t taste exactly like dairy cheese because they’re not dairy cheese – and no two dairy cheeses taste the same anyway. But some vegan cheeses taste really good, so pile up the crackers and pickles and have your very own vegan cheese taster session to find out which are the ones for you.
- It’s easy to blame the people who eat tofu or drink soya milk because they’re the most visible consumers of these beans. But they are not the main consumers of soya. Most of the world’s crop, in fact, is fed to farmed animals, including to fish.20 Most of the world’s soya is indirectly eaten by meat-eaters.
- There is no messing up. Taking part in Veganuary signals that you’re going to give plant-based eating a good go for those 31 days, but there is no one hiding in your fridge to leap out at you if you come home with a cheese-encrusted pizza late one night. You won’t be shamed on social media or outed on the national news.
- Remind yourself why you’re doing this! Write down all the reasons why you wanted to give veganism a try, and see if they remain.
- Connect with other vegans by joining vegan groups in real life or online.
- Read the testimonials within this book. They’re inspirational, and written by people who have experienced exactly what you’re experiencing, and have got through it.
- Remember it’s OK to take it slow. It may be better to replace one product at a time and transition over a period than to leap straight in if you’re finding it difficult.
- Keep a diary so you can remind yourself how far you’ve come and what you’ve already achieved, how amazing you felt on the good days, the new favourite foods that you’ve discovered and why this is important to you.
- Be good to yourself. Being vegan isn’t about deprivation! Treat yourself with a bar of chocolate (not just the dark ones; there are lots of vegan ‘milk’ chocolates available, too!), a glass of wine or a meal out at your favourite vegan cafe or restaurant.
- Do what you love! If you love to cook, treat yourself to a great vegan cookbook and test out some new recipes.
- Visit a vegan festival
- Vegucated:
    - **Tags:** #fup
    - **Note:** .fup
- Forks Over Knives:
    - **Tags:** #fup
- PlantBuilt
    - **Tags:** #fup
    - **Note:** .fup
