# Love Yourself Like Your Life Depends on It

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: Kamal Ravikant

- "I don't do a post now unless I'm worried about what people will think about me."
- As a wise friend likes to remind me, this is a practice.  You don't go to the gym once and consider yourself done.  Same here.  Meditation is a practice.  Working out is a practice.  Loving yourself, perhaps the most important of all, is a practice.
- I was in a bad way.  Miserable out of my mind.  There were days when I'd lie in bed, the drapes closed, day outside sliding into night and back to day, and I just didn't want to deal.  Deal with my thoughts.  Deal with being sick.  Deal with heartache.  Deal with my company tanking.  Deal....with....life. Here is what saved me.
- I'd reached my breaking point.  I remember it well.  I couldn't take it anymore.  I was done.  Done with all of this.  This misery, this pain, this angst, this being me.  I was sick of it, done.   Done.  Done.  Done. And in that desperation, I climbed out of bed, staggered over to my desk, opened my notebook, and wrote: "This day, I vow to myself to love myself, to treat myself as someone I love truly and deeply - in my thoughts, my actions, the choices I make, the experiences I have, each moment I am conscious, I make the decision I LOVE MYSELF."
- How to love myself, I did not know.  All I knew was that I'd made a vow - something far greater than a commitment, bigger than an I-wish or a nice-to-have.  A vow.  I was going all in or destroy myself trying.  There was no middle ground.
- In my bedroom, in the darkness, with a city outside that had no idea of the decision that'd been made or even cared, I set out to love myself. And the way I did it, it was the simplest thing I could think of and one that I knew I was capable of.  I started telling myself, "I love myself."  A thought I would repeat again and again.
- First, lying in bed for hours, repeating to myself, "I love myself, I love myself, I love myself, I love myself, I love myself...."
- First in bed, then showering, then when online, then when I'd be talking to someone, inside my head, I'd be going, "I love myself, I love myself, I love myself, I love myself."  It became the anchor, the one true thing.
- And I got better.  My body started healing faster.  My state of mind grew lighter.  But the thing I never expected or imagined, life got better.  But not just better, things happened that were fantastically out of my reach, things I couldn't have dreamt of.  It was as if life said, "Finally, you idiot!  And let me show you that you made the right decision."
- In all honesty, in the beginning, I didn't believe that I loved myself.  How many of us do?  But it didn't matter what I believed.  All that mattered was doing it and I did it the simplest way I could think, by focusing on one thought again and again and again and again until it was more on my mind than not.   Imagine that.  Imagine the feeling of catching yourself loving yourself without trying.  It's like catching a sunset out of the corner of your eye.  It will stop you.
- Why not "I like myself?"  Or, "I accept myself?"  Why oh why oh why does it have to be love?   Here's my theory: If you've ever been a baby, you've experienced love.  The mind knows it on a fundamental, even primal level.  So, unlike most words, "love" has the ability to slip past the conscious and into the subconscious, where magic happens.
- What if you don't believe that you love yourself?  Doesn't matter.  Your role is to lay down the pathways, brick upon brick, reinforce the connections between the neurons.  The mind already has a strong wiring for love.  The body knows it as well.  It knows that love nurtures,…
- Your job is purely to love yourself.  Truly and deeply.  Feel it.  Again and again.  Make it your single-minded focus.  The mind and body will respond…
- Here's the best part, one that makes me smile as I write this.  As you love yourself, life loves you back.  I don't think it has a choice either.  I can't explain how it works, but I know it to be true.   When you find yourself using the word "…
- I've tried to break down exactly what I did that worked.  And how one can replicate it.  Comes down to three things which I'll explain in later chapters: 1.  Mental loop 2.  A meditation   3.  One question All three gently return me to self-love.  That's the beauty of this practice.  It's…
- There is one requirement.  A fierce commitment to loving yourself.  This, I'm afraid, can't be skipped.  What if you don't believe that you love or, heck, even like yourself?  Doesn't matter.  If you have to build up to it, that's ok.  The practice works in a way the mind is designed to function.  The mind has no choice but to adapt…
- Darkness is the absence of light.  If you remember this, it will change your life.  Changed mine.  It is this concept…
- Any negative thought is darkness.  How do you remove it?  Do you fight fear or worry?  Do you push or drown away sadness and pain?  Doesn't work.   Instead, imagine you're in a dark room and it's bright outside.  Your job is to go to the window, pull out a rag, and start cleaning.  Just clean.  And soon enough, light enters naturally, taking the darkness away. It's that simple.  Each time the mind shifts…
- I once heard someone explain thoughts as this: we, as human beings, think that we're thinking.  Not true.  Most of the time, we're remembering.  We're re-living memories.  We're running familiar patterns and loops in our head.  For happiness, for procrastination, for sadness.  Fears, hopes, dreams, desires.  We have loops for everything.   We keep replaying the loops and they in turn, trigger feelings.  It's automatic to the point where we believe that we have no choice.  But that is far from the truth.
- Imagine a thought loop as this: a pathway laid down by constant use.  Like a groove in rock created by water.  Enough time, enough intensity, and you've got a river.   If you had a thought once, it has no power over you.  Repeat it again and again, especially with emotional intensity, feeling it, and over time, you're creating the grooves, the mental river.  Then it controls you. And that is why a focused mental loop is the solution.  Take this one thought, I love myself.  Add emotional intensity if you can - it deepens the groove faster than anything.  Feel the thought.  Run it again and again.  Feel it.  Run it.  Whether you believe it or not doesn't matter, just focus on this one thought.  Make it your truth.
- The goal here is to create a groove deeper than the ones laid down over the years - the ones that create disempowering feelings.  They took time as well.  Some we've had since childhood.
- It takes time, sure.  Took me a month to go from misery to magic.  But you will notice changes, shifts in your feelings, beautiful happenings in your life.  Expect them.  There'll be more and more until one day, you'll be walking outside in the sunshine, feeling good, loving life and life loving you back, and you'll stop and realize that it's now your natural state. Can you imagine a better way to be?
- Even if you don't do anything else, please do this.  It will make a difference.   Each day, I meditate for seven minutes.  Why seven minutes?  Because I put on a piece of music that I like, one that is soothing and calm, piano and flute, one that I associate good feelings with, and it happens to be seven minutes long.   I sit with my back against a wall, put on my headphones, listen to the music, and imagine galaxies and stars and the Universe above, and I imagine all the light from space flowing into my head and down into my body, going wherever it needs to go.   I breathe slowly, naturally.  As I inhale, I think, I love myself.  Then I exhale and let out whatever the response in my mind and body is, whether there is one or not.  That's it.  Simple.
- Inhale: I love myself.   Exhale: Breathe out what comes up.   Inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale.  Natural.  The music flows.
- Once again, there's no need to consciously create healing or anything positive.  The subconscious takes care of it.  All I have to do is give it the image - in this case, light; give it the thought - in this case, loving myself.  It does the rest.
- This is an intense practice because it is focused.  But does it feel intense?  No, quite peaceful, actually.  I think that's what real emotional intensity is, one that creates peace and love and growth.
- Instructions
- Step 1: Put on music.  Something soothing, gentle, preferably instrumental.  A piece you have positive associations with.
- Step 2: Sit with back against wall or window.  Cross legs or stretch them out, whatever feels natural.
- Step 3: Close eyes.  Smile slowly.  Imagine a beam of light pouring into your head from above.
- Step 4: Breathe in, say to yourself in your mind, I love myself.  Slowly.  Be gentle with yourself.
- Step 5: Breathe out and along with it, anything that arises.  Any thoughts, emotions, feelings, memories, fears, hopes, desires.  Or nothing.  Breathe it out.  No judgment, no attachment to anything.  Be kind to yourself.
- Step 6: Repeat 4 and 5 until the music ends.
- (When your attention wanders, notice it and smile.  Smile at it as if it's a child doing what a child does.  And with that smile, return to your breath.  Step 4, step 5.  Mind wanders, notice, smile kindly, return to step 4, step 5).
- Step 7: When music ends, open your eyes slowly.  Smile.  Do it from the inside out.  This is your time.  This is purely yours.
- It's easy to say "I love myself" while locked inside my apartment, recovering from being sick.  Tougher when I'm back to the land of the living, interacting with people who have their own issues and mental loops.   That is where the question came from.  In dealing with others and reacting to their negative emotions with my own, I found myself asking this question:  If I loved myself truly and deeply, would I let myself experience this? The answer, always, was a no.
- This question is deceptively simple in its power.  It gently shifts your focus from wherever you are - whether it's anger or pain or fear, any form of darkness - to where you want to be.  And that is love.  You mind and life have no choice but to follow.
- When I get home, before I go inside, I pause and realize something.  The love, it doesn't have to necessarily be for another, does it?  Love is an emotion, love is a feeling, love is a way of being.  That spring in the step, that smile, that openness, can't it simply come from loving ourselves?
- And here's the interesting part.  When we love ourselves, we naturally shine, we are naturally beautiful.  And that draws others to us.  Before we know it, they're loving us and it's up to us to choose who to share our love with.
- ANOTHER MEDITATION
- Step 1: Set a timer for 5 minutes.
- Step 2: Stand in front of a mirror, nose a few inches away.  Relax.  Breathe.
- Step 3: Look into your eyes.  Helps if you focus on one.  Your left eye.  Don't panic, it's only you.  Relax.  Breathe slowly, naturally, until you develop a rhythm.
- Step 4: Looking into your left eye, say, "I love myself."  Whether you believe it that moment or not isn't important.  What's important is you saying it to yourself, looking into your eyes, where there is no escape from the truth.  And ultimately, the truth is loving yourself.
- Step 5: Repeat "I love myself" gently, pausing occasionally to watch your eyes.
- When the five minutes are up, smile.  You've just communicated the truth to yourself in a deep, visceral way.  In a way the mind cannot escape.
- Memory is not set in stone.  Any neuroscientist will tell you that.  The more you remember something, especially if it's emotionally charged, the more you will reinforce the pathways connecting the neurons.  Simply put, the more you think about it, the more you feel it, the stronger the memory. Here's the interesting part.  It's not just the act of recall that strengthens a memory, another factor shapes and even changes it - the state of mind you are in when remembering something.   The implications of this are transformative.
- There's a solution here, a powerful one.  If a painful memory arises, don't fight it or try to push it away - you're in quicksand.  Struggle reinforces pain.  Instead, go to love.  Love for yourself.  Feel it.  If you have to fake it, fine.  It'll become real eventually.  Feel the love for yourself as the memory ebbs and flows.  That will take the power away. And, even more importantly, it will shift the wiring of the memory.  Do it again and again.  Love.  Re-wire.  Love.  Re-wire.  It's your mind.  You can do whatever you want.
- Fighting fear doesn't work.  It just drags us in closer.  One has to focus on what is real.  On the truth.  When in darkness, don't fight it.  You can't win.  Just find the nearest switch, turn on the light.
- James Altucher, in one of his best blog posts, talks about how he stops negative thoughts in their tracks with a simple mind trick.  "Not useful," he tells himself.  It's a switch, a breaker of sorts, shifts the pattern of the fear.
- Fear, when used properly, is a useful tool.  It serves us well when near a blazing inferno or standing at the edge of a cliff.  But outside of this, it's hijacked the mind.  To the point where it's difficult to distinguish the mind and our thoughts from fear itself.
- So I ask myself the question, "if I loved myself, truly and deeply, what would I do?"  I love this question.  There is no threat, no right or wrong answer, only an invitation to my truth in this present moment.   The answer is simple: I'd commit to the practice.  And I would also share the next thing I've learned, which is, don't let yourself coast when things are going great.  It's easy to wish for health when you're sick.  When you're doing well, you need just as much vigilance. Honestly, it scares me a little.  Coming from the dumps, when life works, it's great.  But if life is working, and you do the practice, how high can life go?  Can I handle it?  Heck, do I even deserve it?
- So I return to the question, "if I loved myself, truly and deeply, what would I do?"  The answer comes easy: I'd fly.  Fly as high as I possibly can.  Then, I'd fly higher.
- Ever catch your mind in a mental loop, replaying some old story, an old hurt, the same pattern?  Who are you?  The thought or the observer of the thought? If you're the observer, then what is the thought?   Or are you a thought observing another thought?
- This I know: the mind, left to itself, repeats the same stories, the same loops.  Mostly ones that don't serve us.  So what's practical, what's transformative, is to consciously choose a thought.  Then practice it again and again.  With emotion, with feeling, with acceptance.   Lay down the synaptic pathways until the mind starts playing it automatically.  Do this with enough intensity over time and the mind will have no choice.  That's how it operates.  Where do you think your original loops came from?
- The goal, if there is one, is to practice until the thought you chose becomes the primary loop.  Until it becomes the filter through which you view life.  Then practice some more.
- Thousands of years ago, a Roman poet wrote, “I am a human being, therefore nothing human is foreign to me.” I believe it to be true.  So if this is possible for one human, it is possible for anyone.  The path might be different, but the destination same.
- Remain open to that one possibility and you’ll experience the beauty of watching the world around you dance its dance while inside, you fully accept this marvelous amazing human being you are.  The feeling is, for lack of a better word, magic.
- Often, the price for not being present is pain.
- Now, I understand what the monk meant.  There is a surrender to what is, to the moment.  Whenever I notice fear in my mind, instead of pushing it aside or using it as fuel, I say to myself, "it's ok."  A gentle yes to myself.  To the moment, to what the mind is feeling. Often, that is enough to deflate the fear.  From there, I shift to the truth of loving myself.   Knowing this, I realize that I still could have built a great company, had a beautiful relationship, managed my health, and reached out to my friend before she passed away and told her how much I loved her.  I could have done all of this from a place of gentleness, a place of self-love.
- A side effect of loving myself fiercely was that it started to dislodge old patterns, thoughts and beliefs that I didn't even know existed.
- Here's one example.  I've always known that growth is important to me.  If I don't feel like I'm growing, I'm drifting, depressed.  But what I didn't know, until the practice of self-love showed me, was my belief about growth: real growth comes through intense, difficult, and challenging situations. Can you see how that would define the path of my life?
- What we believe, that's what we seek, it's the filter we view our lives through.  I've actively thrown myself at intense and difficult situations.  All situations where I grew, but at what price?
- I respectfully disagree.  It's like what they tell you during pre-flight instructions; in case of emergency, if oxygen masks drop from above, put yours on before you help someone else.
- As I started to love myself, things inside me shifted.  Fear strengthens the ego.  Love softens it.  I became more open, vulnerable.  It was natural to be gentle with others, even when they weren't loving towards me.  And the times it wasn't easy, I had the resources - the loop, the meditation, the question - to return to self-love. There is a power in this.  Rather than reacting to situations, I found myself choosing how I wanted to be.  That, in turn, created better situations, and ultimately a far better life.
- Rather, truth is simple.  Truth is succinct.
- I think that instead of reading loads of self-help books, attending various seminars, listening to different preachers, we should just pick one thing.  Something that feels true for us.  Then practice it fiercely.   Place our bet on it, then go all out.  That's where magic happens.  Where life blows away our expectations.
