# Playing the Long Game

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: Sam Kyle

- Someone's sitting in the shade today because someone planted a tree a long time ago. ― Warren Buffett
- Wayne Gretzky has been called the greatest hockey player ever. He broke numerous records during his twenty-year career.   His incredible success didn’t come from any unusual physical abilities. In fact, at the start of his career, critics derided Gretzky for his small frame. He was a great deal shorter and lighter than the average hockey player. He was also slower. No one would have picked him to be the GOAT—yet that is what he became. By the time he retired he had set a standard for playing hockey that will be extremely hard to beat. How did he do it? He played a different game than everyone else.   Early on in life during backyard practice sessions, Gretzky’s father taught him a simple rule. Skate to where the puck is going, not where it’s been. Simple, but critically important.   While other players relied on their speed and strength, Gretzky focused his attention on being two steps ahead of them at all times. He was always calculating where the puck was likely to move to and positioning himself there. He didn’t follow it or care about where it had just been. He went where the puck was going and he let it come to him. That was the secret to his success.   His ability to predict where to move was so uncanny, other players described it as supernatural. They said he had eyes in the back of his head. But there was nothing supernatural about it. He pinned that ability on his father’s tutoring.   People who play the long game in life often hear similar comments from the rest of us. We say they’re lucky. We say they have a sixth sense or abnormal inbuilt intuition. We say they have exceptional innate abilities, that it’s all genetics. We don’t give them any credit for their approach, and thus we miss out on learning from long-gamers. We think, “Well, you can’t learn luck,” and give up before we start. But long-gamers don’t rely on luck.   Long-gamers think differently than the norm. Gretzky knew that to be one of the best he had to play a different game than everyone else. If you learn to do the same, you can be as successful. Maybe you won’t be the absolute greatest in your field, but you can be in the top 1%. And no matter what you do, that would be pretty damn amazing.
- The problem is, most of us are playing the short game, focusing on today’s satisfaction. Playing the short game is the norm because it’s easy. It’s the path of least resistance, the choice we naturally default towards, it’s fun and gratifying. Plus, it’s likely to be what everyone else around you is doing. It’s hard to be the odd one out.   Playing the short game means things like spending when we could save for retirement. Eating junk food when we know we could go for a healthier option. Watching TV instead of exercising as a way to unwind. Tweeting instead of sitting down to read a book. While there’s nothing wrong with these things in small doses, when we play the short game across every area of our lives, it leads to mediocrity. It means disappointment further down the line.   Playing the short game is a net negative. We miss out on the huge rewards that come with thinking ahead. The problem is that the effects of the short game tend to be hidden until it’s too late to reverse them. They’re invisible in the moment, so it’s easy to pretend (or genuinely believe) they don’t exist. Nope, my bank account isn’t sinking into the red. Nah, I’m not falling behind at work and making myself super vulnerable in the next recession. And so on.
