# The Truth Machine

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: Paul Vigna, Michael J. Casey

- In The Age of Cryptocurrency, we explored the digital currency bitcoin and its promise of a fairer global payments system, one that functions without banks and other financial intermediaries. As that book was going to print, Bitcoin’s* wider application—how its core operating system can help resolve problems of trust between individuals and businesses when they trade assets, enter into contracts, assert claims to property, or share valuable or sensitive information—came to the fore.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- MIT’s Digital Currency Initiative,
    - **Tags:** #fup
    - **Note:** .fup
- The Truth Machine expands the conversation we began in 2015 and takes it to a level higher. It explores how Bitcoin’s technology and its various offshoots point to a general redesign of social organizations, fostering many more alternative applications.
- In this twenty-first-century economy, power is defined by whoever has authority to collect, store, and share data. Currently, that authority is centralized. It is concentrated among a narrow number of giant tech companies. If you’re wondering why that’s problematic, just think of the influence that Facebook’s hidden algorithm, which prioritizes the company’s business model above all other objectives, has had on our politics.
- The ideas behind the blockchain* have now unleashed a struggle to turn that structure of concentrated power on its head, to figure out how the capacity to control and manage information might shift to a decentralized system that no one controls.
- ## Introduction A SOCIETY-BUILDING TOOL
- Sixty miles east of Amman, in a 5.6-square-mile block of dry, stony ground carved out of the Jordanian desert, lies the UN High Commission for Refugees’ Azraq camp. Teeming with 32,000 desperate Syrians living in pre-fabricated shelters—rows and rows of white, corrugated steel cabins arranged in a military-like grid—Azraq poses the logistical challenges of a small city. Yet UNHCR and the other aid agencies that give the refugees food, shelter, and a modicum of hope can’t count on the kinds of institutions and infrastructure that normal cities use to ensure order, security, and functionality for their residents.
- It’s fitting then that this pop-up city, in real need of some functioning social capital, is now the scene of a radical experiment in new models of community governance, institution-building, and the management of resources. At the heart of that effort is blockchain technology, the decentralized ledger-keeping system that underpins the digital currency bitcoin and promises a more reliable, immediate way to trace transactions.
- The World Food Program (WFP), a UN agency that feeds 80 million people worldwide, is putting 10,000 Azraq refugees through a pilot that uses this system to better coordinate food distribution. In doing so, the WFP is tackling a giant administrative challenge: how to ensure, in an environment where theft is rampant and few people carry personal identifying documents, that everyone gets their fair share of food.
- In leaving behind her home, her assets, her circle of neighbors and family, and her ties to what was once a more coherent Syrian nation, Najah was also losing something extremely powerful that the rest of us take for granted: a societal system of trust, identity, and record-keeping that ties our past to our present, anchors us as human beings, and lets us participate in society.
- They are reconstructing societies, building them all over again. And it turns out that blockchain technology provides a tool for doing just that.
- It’s in this realm, where human beings must depend on reliable institutions to keep track of their social interactions and provide proof that their claims are valid, that blockchain technology comes into its own. With this system we would no longer have to trust institutions to maintain transaction records and vouch for us, since blockchain-based programs comprise an intricate set of features that result in something that’s never existed before: a transaction record that is visible to all and can be verified at any moment, but that is not controlled by any one central authority. This means two things: nobody can alter the data to suit their own ends, and everybody has greater control over their own data.
- Under this new pilot, all that’s needed to institute a payment with a food merchant is a scan of a refugee’s iris. In effect, the eye becomes a kind of digital wallet, obviating the need for cash, vouchers, debit cards, or smartphones, which reduces the danger of theft.
- According to WFP spokesman Alex Sloan, the pilot has already shown success: it has saved money and created a much more efficient way of dealing with inconsistencies in refugees’ accounts.
- The World Food Program’s Azraq experiment is just one example of how international agencies are exploring blockchain solutions to the problems of the world’s neediest.
- What do these decades-old international organizations see in an arcane digital technology built by the crypto-libertarians and Cypherpunks who gave us Bitcoin? It’s the prospect that this decentralized computing system could resolve the issue of social capital deficits that we discussed in the context of the Azraq refugee camp. By creating a common record of a community’s transactions and activities that no single person or intermediating institution has the power to change, the UN’s blockchain provides a foundation for people to trust that they can securely interact and exchange value with each other.
- Until now, we have relied on institutions such as banks, government registries, and countless other intermediaries to sit in the middle of our economic exchanges with each other. These “trusted third parties” maintain records on our behalf so that the rest of us have enough trust in the system to interact, exchange items of value, and, hopefully, build vibrant, functioning societies. The problem is that these fee-charging institutions, which act as gatekeepers, dictating who can and cannot engage in commercial interactions, add cost and friction to our economic activities.
- The Internet put us on this disintermediating path some time ago, well before the blockchain came along. But it’s worth noting that at the heart of each new Internet application that cuts out some incumbent middleman there has typically been a technology that helps humans deal with their perennial mistrust issues.
- What blockchain technology says is, “Why stop at Uber?” Why do we even need this particular company, which takes 25 percent from each ride and has a reputation for abusing its “God’s View” knowledge of passengers’ rides? How about a totally decentralized solution, such as the Tel Aviv–based, blockchain-powered ride-sharing application Commuterz?
- The broad idea is that by deferring the management of trust to a decentralized network guided by a common protocol instead of relying upon a trusted intermediary, and by introducing new, digital forms of money, tokens, and assets, we can change the very nature of social organization. We can encourage new approaches to collaboration and cooperation that weren’t possible before, transforming a wide array of industries and organizational settings.
- Here is sampling of possible use cases, and it is by no means an exhaustive list:
- Inviolable property registries, which people can use to prove that they own their houses, cars, or other assets;
- Real-time, direct, bank-to-bank settlement of securities exchanges, which could unlock trillions of dollars in an interbank market that currently passes such transactions through dozens of specialized institutions in a process that takes two to seven days;
- Self-sovereign identities, which don’t depend on a government or a company to assert a person’s ID;
- Decentralized computing, which supplants the corporate business of cloud computing and Web hosting with the hard drives and processing power of ordinary users’ computers;
- Decentralized Internet of Things transactions, where devices can securely talk and transact with each other without the friction of an intermediary, making possible big advances in transportation and decentralized energy grids;
- Blockchain-based supply chains, in which suppliers use a common data platform to share information about their business processes to greatly improve accountability, efficiency, and financing with the common purpose of producing a particular good;
- Decentralized media and content, which would empower musicians and artists—and, in theory, anyone who posts information of value to the Net—to take charge of their digital content, knowing they can track and manage the use of this “digital asset.”
- Blockchain technology could help achieve what some commentators are calling the promise of “Internet 3.0,” a re-architecting of the Net to assert the core objective of decentralization that inspired many of the early online pioneers who built the Internet 1.0.
- One mark of the business world’s enthusiasm is seen in the trajectory of media company CoinDesk’s Consensus conference, the marquee annual event for businesses interested in blockchain technology.
- In essence, the blockchain is a digital ledger that’s shared across a decentralized network of independent computers, which update and maintain it in a way that allows anyone to prove the record is complete and uncorrupted.
- The blockchain achieves this with a special algorithm embedded into a common piece of software run by all the computers in the network. The algorithm consistently steers the computers toward a shared consensus on what new data to add to the ledger, incorporating all manner of economic exchanges, claims of ownership, and other forms of valuable information.
- Once new ledger entries are introduced, special cryptographic protections make it virtually impossible to go back and change them. The computers’ owners are either paid in a digital currency, which incentivizes them to work on protecting the system’s integrity, or they do their work as part of a commitment to a consortium agreement.
- Blockchains point the entire digital economy toward something people are calling the Internet of Value. Whereas the first version of the Internet allowed people to send information directly to each other, in the Internet of Value people can send anything of value to each other, be it currencies, assets, or valuable data that was previously too sensitive to transmit online.
- ## One THE GOD PROTOCOL
- It might surprise you to read this, but the most subversive, controversial, anti-authoritarian idea in the world of finance, an idea so powerful every government on the planet is trying to figure out whether to co-opt it or outlaw it, the dream of the most fervent libertarian, dark-Web denizens, is a ledger. Like, an accounting book.
- What makes this ledger so radical, so controversial, is the way in which this record of transactions, known as a blockchain, is created and maintained.
- The trinity of writing, money, and ledgers made it possible for human beings to do business beyond kinship groups and thus form larger settlements. And while the contributions of money and writing are well appreciated, ledgers tend to be known only by those who studied the dry science of accounting.
- Why have ledgers been so important throughout history? Exchanges of goods and services have defined the expansion of societies, but this was possible only if people could keep track of the exchanges. It wasn’t so difficult for everyone in a small village to remember that someone had killed a pig and to trust—a word we’ll encounter throughout this book—that all who ate of it would find some way to later repay the hunter, perhaps with a new arrowhead or some other thing of value. It was another to manage these cross-societal obligations across a larger group of strangers—especially when moving outside of kinship boundaries made it harder to trust each other.
- Ledgers are record-keeping devices that help deal with those problems of complexity and trust. They help us keep track of all the multiple exchanges upon which society is built. Without them, the giant, teeming cities of twenty-first-century society would not exist.
- Money itself is intrinsically linked to the idea of a ledger. Physical currency like gold coins and paper money are, similarly, record-keeping devices; they too aid with societal memory. It’s just that rather than existing within a written account of transactions, a currency’s record-keeping function is abstracted into the token—the gold coin, the dollar bill. That token is communally recognized as conveying some right to goods or services that the bearer has earned from tasks performed in the past.
- Once human beings started to engage in exchanges of money across distances, tokens’ capacity to play this record-keeping function broke down. There was no way for the payer to physically deliver the tokens to the payee without having to trust a courier who might well steal it. The solution came with the advent of a new form of ledger-keeping known as double-entry bookkeeping, an approach that was pioneered, as we’ll discuss lower down, by a clique of Renaissance bankers. In adopting this bookkeeping, they thrust banking into the payments business and, for centuries, helped to greatly expand the capacity for human exchange.
- It’s not an overstatement to say that this idea of banking built the modern world. But it also amplified a problem that had always dogged ledgers: can society trust the record-keeper? Bitcoin tackled this problem by reimagining the ledger itself. It confronted the problem that bankers themselves are not necessarily to be trusted and might rip you off with hidden fees and opaque charges. Bitcoin did this by, for the first time, entrusting responsibility for confirming and maintaining the ledger of transactions to a community of users who checked each other’s work and agreed on a common record to represent their shared approximation of the truth.
- our convoluted credit and debit card payments system, for example, which routes transactions through a long sequence of intermediaries—at least two banks, one or two payment processors, a card network manager (such as Visa or Mastercard), and a variety of other institutions, depending on where the transaction takes place. Each entity in that system maintains its own separate ledger, which it later must reconcile with every other entity’s independent records, a process that takes time, incurs costs, and carries risks. Whereas you might think that money is being instantly transferred when you swipe your card at a clothing store, in reality the whole process takes several days for the funds to make all those hops and finally settle in the storeowner’s account, a delay that creates risks and costs.
- The key architectural feature of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrency systems that lets these peer-to-peer transactions happen is the distributed nature of the blockchain ledger. That decentralized structure is made possible because of a unique software program that uses strong cryptography and a groundbreaking incentive system to guide the ledger-keepers’ computers to reach consensus. It does so in a way that makes it virtually impossible for anyone to change the historical record once it has been accepted. The result is something remarkable: a record-keeping method that brings us to a commonly accepted version of the truth that’s more reliable than any truth we’ve ever seen.
- ### The Trust Bubble
- Lehman Brothers is often Exhibit A in the breakdown of trust in the twenty-first century. A lion of Wall Street, the firm was revealed to be little more than a debt-ravaged shell kept alive only by shady accounting—in other words, the bank was manipulating its ledgers.
- The crash of 2008 revealed most of what we know about Wall Street’s confidence game at that time. It entailed a vast manipulation of ledgers. The recorded value of the assets those ledgers were supposed to track—including those havoc-causing credit default swaps—turned out to be largely vapor. The shock of Lehman wasn’t so much that it happened, but that even most experts trusted the ledgers so completely until it was too late.
- Trust—particularly trust in our institutions—is a vital social resource, the true lubricant of all human interaction. When it works, we take it for granted—we wait our place in line, follow road rules, and assume everyone else will do the same. The trust behind these interactions is not present in our conscious minds. But when trust is lacking, things really, really break down.
- This trust problem is intrinsically connected with ledgers and record-keeping. To comprehend that, we’ll explore the little-known story of a Franciscan friar with a love of math who developed a system that fueled Europe’s explosion out of the Dark Ages more directly than the Medici bankers who financed that growth. From there, we can draw a line all the way forward to Lehman Brothers and show how a better accounting system, such as blockchain, could be the answer to society’s deep funk.
- Truth, Trust, and “the Books”
- How is it possible that a business could earn $4.2 billion one year and be out of business the next? The reason is not just because Lehman Brothers was manipulating its ledgers but because it was taking advantage of the trust invested in it by shareholders, regulators, and the public at large.
- Double-entry accounting was popularized in Europe toward the end of the fifteenth century, and most scholars believe it set the table for the flowering of the Renaissance and the emergence of modern capitalism. What is far less well understood is the why. Why was something as dull as bookkeeping so integral to a complete cultural revolution in Europe?
- The value of double-entry bookkeeping, therefore, wasn’t merely in dry efficiency. The ledger came to be viewed as a kind of moral compass, whose use conferred moral rectitude on all involved with it.
- Thanks to mathematical concepts imported from the Middle East during the Crusades, accounting became the moral grounding for the rise of modern capitalism, and the bean counters of capitalism became the priests of a new religion.
- The great irony of 2008 was that our belief in a system of accounting, a belief woven so deeply inside our collective psyche that we’re not even aware of it, made us vulnerable to fraud. Even when done honestly, accounting is sometimes little more than an educated guess.
- Modern accounting, especially at the big, international banks, has become so convoluted that it is virtually useless.
- The God Protocol
- On October 31, 2008, while the world was drowning in the financial crisis, a little-noticed “white paper” was released by somebody using the pen name “Satoshi Nakamoto,” and describing something called “Bitcoin,” an electronic version of cash that didn’t need state backing. At the heart of Nakamoto’s electronic cash was a public ledger that could be viewed by anybody but was virtually impossible to alter. This ledger was essentially a digitized, objective rendering of the truth, and in the years to follow it would come to be called the blockchain.
- In 2005, a computer expert named Ian Grigg, working at a company called Systemics, introduced a trial system he called “triple-entry bookkeeping.”
- For his part, Grigg believed it would lead to a programmable record-keeping system that would make fraud virtually impossible. In a nutshell, the concept took the existing, double-entry bookkeeping system and added a third book: the independent, open ledger that’s secured by cryptographic methods so that no one can change it. Grigg saw it as a way to combat fraud.
- The way Grigg described it, users would maintain their own, double-entry accounts, but added to these digitized books would be another function, essentially a time stamp, a cryptographically secured, signed receipt of every transaction.
- Nick Szabo was an early Cypherpunk* and developed some of the concepts that underlie Bitcoin, which is one reason why some suspect he is Satoshi Nakamoto. His protocol has at its heart a spreadsheet that runs on a “virtual machine”—such as a network of interlinked computers—accessible to multiple parties. Szabo envisioned an intricate system of both private and public data that would protect private identities but provide enough public information about transactions to build up a verifiable transaction history. Szabo’s system—he called it the “God Protocol”—is now more than two decades old. Yet it is remarkably similar to the blockchain platforms and protocols that we’ll learn about in the chapters to come.
- Big Math, Openness, and a New Tool for Agreeing on Facts
- If communities are to engage in exchange and forge functioning societies, they must find a way to arrive at a commonly accepted foundation of truth. And in the digital age of the twenty-first century, when many communities are formed online, where they transcend borders and legal jurisdictions, the old institutions we’ve used to establish those norms of truth won’t function nearly as well. Advocates of blockchain solutions say this truth-discovery process is best left to a distributed approach, one over which no single entity has control. That way the approach is not vulnerable to corruption, attack, error, or disaster. Also, the results should be collated using the hard-to-crack math of cryptography, which prevents them from ever being overwritten in the future.
- The best way to think about blockchain technology, then, is not as a replacement of trust—as a “trustless” solution, as some cryptocurrency fanatics damagingly describe it—but as a tool upon which society can create the common stories it needs to sow even greater trust, to build social capital, and to forge a better world.
- If it can foster consensus in the way it has been shown to with Bitcoin, it’s best understood as a Truth Machine.
- ## Two “GOVERNING” THE DIGITAL ECONOMY
- The Internet, in case you weren’t aware, is owned. There are a handful of dominant companies that essentially control everything: Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple (GAFA, some call them). We trust them to intermediate our e-mail and social media exchanges with each other, to manage our Internet searches, to store our data, etc. To varying degrees they do what seems to be a good job, but there is a huge cost in terms of the power we hand to these organizations. We, the general public, their unpaid product developers, literally create value for these companies, creating content and handing over our valuable data. We get services in return, yes, but the imbalance in the relationship is highly problematic.
- A Hacker’s Dream
- If we want to live in the digital economy, it seems, either we let private companies control the data with all the capacity for abuse that entails or we let governments control those private companies and expose ourselves to the kind of intrusions that Edward Snowden revealed at the NSA. But the choice need not be so stark. We hope to demonstrate that the solution may lie in a third way, one that involves reimagining the very structure of how online data is organized. The ideas behind Bitcoin and blockchain technology give us a new starting point from which to address this problem. That’s because the question of who controls our data should stem first from a more fundamental question about who or what institutions we must trust in order to engage in commerce, obtain services, or participate in modern society.
- Solving data security may first require a deliberate move from what we call the centralized trust model to one of decentralized trust.
- In an age when technology is supposed to be lowering the cost of entry, the outdated centralized trust-management system has proven expensive and restrictive (think about the 2 billion people in the world who are unbanked). It has also failed—spectacularly. Even though the world spent an estimated $75 billion on cybersecurity in 2015, according to estimates by Gartner, total annual losses from online fraud theft were running at $400 billion that year, said Inga Beale, CEO of British insurance market Lloyd’s of London.
- This colossal failure to protect global commerce is directly attributable to a mismatch between the centralized way in which we process and store information and the decentralizing tendencies of a global “sharing” economy that’s pushing for more peer-to-peer and device-to-device commerce.
- Domain name registrations are managed by increasingly large, centralized, third-party providers while lightweight IoT devices are getting into the hands of an ill-prepared general public. That combination is a hacker’s dream.
- The potential power of this concept starts with the example of Bitcoin. Even though that particular blockchain may not provide the ultimate solution in this use case, it’s worth recalling that without any of the classic, centrally deployed cybersecurity tools such as firewalls, and with a tempting “bounty” of more than $160 billion in market cap value at the time we went to print, Bitcoin’s core ledger has thus far proven to be unhackable.
- Security by Design
- One reason why Bitcoin has survived is because it leaves hackers nothing to hack. The public ledger contains no identifying information about the system’s users. Even more important, no one owns or controls that ledger. There is no single master version; with every batch of confirmed transactions, the so-called blocks of the blockchain, a new, updated version of the entire ledger is created and relayed to every node. As such, there is no central vector of attack. If one node on the network is compromised and someone tries to undo or rewrite transactions in that node’s local version of the ledger, the nodes controlling the hundreds of other accepted versions will simply refuse to include data from the compromised node in the updates.
- A more radical solution is to embrace open, “permissionless” blockchains like Bitcoin and Ethereum, where there’s no central authority keeping track of who’s using the network. And in that case, the entire security paradigm—the question of what constitutes “security”—changes. It’s not about building a firewall up around a centralized pool of valuable data controlled by a trusted third party; rather the focus is on pushing control over information out to the edges of the network, to the people themselves, and on limiting the amount of identifying information that’s communicated publicly. Importantly, it’s also about making it prohibitively expensive for someone to try to steal valuable information.
- Let’s compare our current “shared-secret model” for protecting information with the new “device identity model” that Bitcoin’s blockchain could facilitate.
- Currently, a service provider and a customer agree on a secret password and perhaps certain mnemonics—“Your pet’s name?”—to manage access. But that still leaves all the vital data, potentially worth billions of dollars, sitting in a hackable repository on the company’s servers.
- With a permissionless blockchain, control over the data stays with the customer, which means that the point of vulnerability lies with their device.
- A hacker could go after each device, try to steal the private key that’s used to initiate transactions on the decentralized network, and, if they’re lucky, get away with a few thousand dollars in bitcoin. But it’s far less lucrative and far more time-consuming than going after the rich target of a central server.
- Decentralized Economy with Centralized Trust
- How do we get to a world of decentralized trust, so that it costs me close to nothing to safely and confidently engage in transactions with others online?
- Let’s start with the pre-Internet offline economy, the one we inherited from the twentieth century, when the centralized trust model was the only one we could imagine. Under that system, which prevails to this day, we charge banks, public utilities, certificate authorities, government agencies, and countless other centralized entities and institutions with the task of recording everyone’s transactions and exchanges of value. We trust them to monitor our activities—our check writing, our electricity consumption, our monthly payments for everything from newspaper delivery to telephone services—and to reliably and honestly update that information in ledgers that they, and only they, control.
- This system was inherently incompatible with the nobody’s-in-charge, distributed framework of the Internet. The Net was designed to let anyone publish and send information, at near-zero cost, to anyone else anywhere. That opened up vast new economic opportunities, but it also posed unique challenges for trust management.
- ## Afterword to the 2019 Edition
- The Good Side of Bubbles
- The tensions over regulation reflect an age-old debate over how much investors need protection versus how much freedom capital markets require.
- startups are constantly denied money-raising opportunities and that small investors achieve suboptimal returns because of bureaucratic barriers such as securities laws.
- There’s an even bigger point in all of this that’s relevant to our discussion about the outlook for blockchain development. And that is that speculation itself—along with the bubbles and losses it generates—is a necessary element of the innovation cycle.
- In fact, as the Venezuelan economist Carlota Perez argues, bubbles are critical to the process by which capital is deployed to the development of new infrastructure and by which economies undergo major transformations.
- The dot-com bubble of the late nineties provides a lesson. It is popularly remembered as a period of crazy excess, when ill-formed ideas with little to no product development would raise nine-figure amounts in initial public offerings only to go bust in major meltdowns shortly thereafter. What’s less discussed about that period is how the cheap capital unleashed by the boom funded the development of key infrastructure: fiber-optic cable, research and development in 3G networks, and the buildout of giant server farms.
- We think something similar is happening behind the wild volatility and hype of the cryptocurrency and blockchain boom.
- First, it’s potentially a sign that blockchain technology, with its capacity to resolve trust barriers and bypass intermediaries, represents another speculation-infused technological transformation on par with the arrival of the World Wide Web.
- Second, as with the dot-com bubble, the crypto bubble is creating infrastructure that could enable the technologies of the future.
- That freely accessible code will enable the execution of countless as-yet-unimagined ideas once the bubble bursts.
- It is the foundation upon which the decentralized economy of the future will be built.
- Evidence that this development is underway can be found on open-source coding platforms such as Github, where global communities of blockchain developers are working to build and improve myriad decentralized applications.
- Still, relying on the technicians to make sure this technology lives up to its potential is not enough. If there’s something to be learned from the public narrative around the bubble and the Consensus conference it’s that much also needs to happen at the social level to foster public confidence. We
