# The Heart Is the Bottleneck

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: Tiago Forte

## Highlights

### Highlights

- A Skeptic Goes to the Landmark Forum
- Trekonomics: The Economics of Post-Scarcity
- Why I’m Leaving Medium
- A Pattern Recognition Theory of Mind
- I won’t comment on the feasibility of this project, but I want to draw on many of the same sources to offer a more conservative hypothesis: that many of the capabilities of the human mind can be extended and amplified now, using standard, off-the-shelf hardware and software. Extended cognition will be the bridge from human to artificial intelligence, and construction of that bridge is well underway.
- This implies that our memories are organized in discrete segments. If you try to start mid-segment, you’ll struggle for a bit until your sequential memory kicks in.
- This implies that your memories are sequential, like symbols on a ticker tape. They are designed to be read in a certain direction and in order.
- This implies that your memories are nested. Every action and thought is made up of smaller actions and thoughts.
- Now put these three characteristics together. Which structure best describes nested segments organized in sequential order? A hierarchy. The basic structure and functioning of the human brain is hierarchical.
- Language evolved to take advantage of the hierarchical structure of our brains. Every concept is made up of smaller concepts, all the way down to the most fundamental ideas. We call this array of recursively linked concepts our “conceptual hierarchy.”
- So if human cognition is hierarchical, what are these hierarchies made up of? Patterns.
- Deep Blue, the computer that defeated the chess champion Garry Kasparov in 1997, was capable of analyzing 200 million board positions every second. Kasparov was asked how many positions he could analyze each second. His answer was “less than one.” So how was this even a remotely close match? Because Kasparov’s 30 billion neurons, while relatively slow, are able to work in parallel.
- This is how Kasparov’s brain can go head to head against a computer that “thinks” 10 million times faster than him (and also is millions of times more precise): his processing is slow, but massively parallel.
- The way our brains work is through massively parallel pattern recognition. And the organ that has evolved to perform this activity is the neocortex.
- We’ll call these cortical mini-columns Pattern Recognizers, or PRs for short. Each PR contains approximately 100 neurons, and there are on the order of 300 million of them in the entire neocortex.
- The basic structure of a PR has three parts: the input, the name, and the output.
- The first part is the input – dendrites coming from other PRs that signal the presence of lower-level patterns (generally, dendrites and axons are both nerve fibers, but dendrites receive neuron signals and carry them toward the neuron, while axons transmit nerve signals to other neurons³). Reading a book and seeing certain shapes  – like two conjoined diagonal lines combined with a crossbar – will trigger the inputs to a higher-level pattern, like the letter “A.” The shapes are the “inputs” to a PR dedicated to recognizing the letter “A.”
- The second part of a PR is its name. That is, the specific pattern it is designed to detect. Although some PRs are coded to recognize language, these patterns are not limited to letters and words. They could be shapes, colors, feelings, sensations – basically anything we are capable of thinking, learning, predicting, recognizing, or acting on. In the example above, “A” is the name of the PR designated to recognize the letter A.
- The third part is the output – axons emerging from the PR that signal the presence of its designated pattern.
- When the inputs to a PR cross a certain threshold, it fires. That is, it emits a nerve impulse to the higher-level PRs it connects to. This is essentially the “A” PR shouting “Hey guys! I just saw the letter “A”!” When the PR for “Apple” hears such signals for a, p, p again, l, and e, it fires itself, shouting “Hey guys! I just saw “Apple!” And so on up the hierarchy.
- What’s important to know about this conceptual hierarchy is that signals flow downward as well as upward.
- The neocortex is not just recognizing the world. It is always attempting to predict what will happen next, moment by moment. If it expects something strongly enough, the recognition threshold may be so low that it fires even when the full pattern is not present. This is the neurological basis for how our narratives become our reality. You can find evidence for anything if your neocortex is looking for it hard enough. You literally see what you expect to see, and hear what you expect to hear. These downward signals can also be negative or inhibitory. If you are holding a higher-level pattern called “my wife is in Europe,” PRs dedicated to recognizing your wife will be suppressed. That is, their recognition thresholds will be raised. They can still fire if, for example, you see your wife in the checkout line at the grocery store. But it will take more evidence, and you’ll do a double take. This is the neurological basis for blindspots. If you don’t expect to see opportunities, upsides, or possibilities, you will become less likely to recognize even the ones that do show up. Thus your narrative is reinforced, making it even harder to see them.
- In this model, learning is not a matter of reconfiguring or building physical structures (which would be difficult and energy-intensive). It is a matter of connectivity between highly uniform pattern recognizers. What changes as we learn and experience things is the connectivity between these modules. The plasticity of our brains comes not from the fact that we can easily construct new nerve fibers or neurons, but that changing these connections is almost plug-and-play.
- The Zeigarnik Effect describes how, when people move on from an incomplete task, the details of that task remain as a sort of “cognitive residue” for some time afterwards. You may have noticed, when stepping away from an intensely focused activity, it takes awhile for your mind to “let go” of the problem. There is a limit to how fast you can switch tasks, because changing context requires “desaturating” the neurons before resaturating them with other thoughts.
- Traversing each level takes between a few hundredths to a few tenths of a second. Thus a moderately high-level pattern such as a human face can take as long as an entire second to recognize. These cognitive transaction costs can be understood as a “turning radius.” The more patterns you have loaded up into multiple levels of your hierarchy, the faster you can make progress, as you recognize patterns everywhere and everything seems to connect to everything else.
- Desired outcomes are lenses This model could also explain the neurological basis of the law of attraction, the belief that “by focusing on positive or negative thoughts people can bring positive or negative experiences into their life.” Setting an intention or formulating a desired outcome (members-only link) is not just wishful thinking. It may actually be our conscious mind triggering a cascade of signals that either inhibit or strengthen connections at every lower level, even the unconscious ones. This is sometimes called the reticular activating system. There is effectively infinite information we could take in through our senses, and therefore an infinite number of interpretations of what it means. Like a GPS system that leads us through any terrain to get us where we want to go, the conceptual hierarchy of our mind is designed to surface what we decide is important and valuable. Whether that includes opportunities and possibilities or problems and challenges is up to us.
- The Digital Productivity Pyramid
- Level 2: Task Management and Workflow
- Includes: Capture: collect what has your attention Clarify: decide what it means Organize: put it where it belongs Reflect: review what you’ve collected Engage: take action
- Although there are many ways to create a task management workflow, there is one that stands above the rest: David Allen’s Getting Things Done (GTD) method. The five stages of GTD are so fundamental to how actionable information is captured and managed to completion that we’ve used them to label this level: Incomplete capturing (i.e. writing down) of your tasks will absolutely become a bottleneck to any ambitious project you want to take on, as decisions and commitments get lost Trying to complete tasks that haven’t been properly clarified (i.e. formulated in a way that makes them actionable and outcome-oriented) is difficult and frustrating, since it won’t be clear why you’re doing them The most comprehensive collection of potential tasks is useless if not organized in a way that they can be quickly identified and acted on Strategic decision making depends on dedicated reflection time, to make sense of all the information being collected And of course, all of these tasks amount to excessive record-keeping if not actually engaged with and acted on
- Level 3: Habit Formation and Behavior Change
- After an initial setup period, each one of the five principles from Level 2 must be put on autopilot to have their full impact. The key is to adopt a critical, automatic habit for each one: Capture => Collection Habit Clarify => Next Physical Action Organize => Project List Reflect => Weekly Review Engage => Contexts/priorities These habits allow the principles of task management to recede into the background, taking up less and less attention over time. By understanding the basic principles, we can find original, creative ways of customizing them to suit our individual needs and preferences.
- Level 4: Personal Knowledge Management (PKM)
- Whereas Level 2 is about taming the flow of information related to actions, Level 4 is about the flow of knowledge. Personal knowledge management (PKM) is a set of skills and tools for an individual to capture, organize, and deploy the knowledge they accumulate while completing their work.
- Level 5: Just-in-Time Project Management
- Read Tiago’s series on Just-In-Time Project Management for the latest developments.
    - **Tags:** #fup
    - **Note:** .fup
- The Future of Ebooks
- Creation over consumption Underlying both of the trends above is a deeper one: people are moving from passively consuming content, to interacting with and creating it. It now feels strange to many of us to sit on the couch and watch a TV show from beginning to end. What feels natural is to have our phone in front of us, posting on social media, commenting on others’ posts, and looking up actors, characters, and explainers. In a way, this has always been true. Books have always called out to be annotated, marked up, underlined, dog-eared, summarized, cross-referenced, shared, loaned, and talked about. From the very beginning, books were social objects, pulling into place around themselves everything from book fairs, to book clubs, to writer’s circles, to conversations around the water cooler. What’s changed is that all that marginalia – the bookmarks, notes, highlights, progress markers, reviews, comments, discussions – once hidden amidst the pages on each of our private bookshelves, has been published and networked online as digital artifacts.
- It has become clear that the book is more of a social artifact than ever. The point-in-time contents inside a black-box container has been unfurled into a stream – an ever-changing conversation around the book, what it means, and why it matters. Time itself starts to become an essential ingredient in the writing – when and how often you engage influences your experience as much as the text itself.
- Kevin Kelly defines the book nicely: “A book is a self-contained story, argument or body of knowledge that takes more than an hour to read. A book is complete in the sense that it contains its own beginning, middle, and end.” This definition starts to boil it down to its essence: a book is now best understood as a concentrated unit of attention.
- The Case for Digital Notes
- Notes are personal, informal, quick and dirty. They are not for public consumption, but for your own personal use, like a leather notebook you keep in your backpack. Notes are open-ended and never finished. “Taking notes” is a continuous process, in which you can noodle on ideas without an immediate purpose in mind. Notes have low standards for quality and polish. They are easy to jot down, because it’s fine if they are messy, incomplete, or totally random. Notes naturally mix diverse types of media. Just like a paper notebook might contain drawings and sketches, quotes and ideas, and even a pasted photo or post-it note, notes naturally combine different kinds of media in one place. Digital notes apps give us the most important benefits of technology – searching, sharing, access on multiple devices, backups, editing, meta-data, linking, copy-and-paste, and many others – while avoiding complicated data entry.
- You Need a Budget: 13 Parallels Between Budgeting and Productivity
- As I read and digested the YNAB approach to personal finance, I began to sense a deep connection to principles of productivity. I’ve concluded that there is a series of fundamental mindset shifts required to manage both money and tasks. It isn’t the particular tool or method you use that makes the difference. It is a shift in perspective and attitude.
- YNAB Summary Here’s a quick summary of the overall method, as I understand it: Rule 0: Identify your top priority for your money (growth, supporting your family, freedom, hobbies, fixing the house, security, retirement, learning) Rule 1: Give every dollar a job, by creating accounts for each of the goals you want to fund (buying a house, saving for a wedding, buying a car, going on vacation), and assigning a portion of the money you currently have to each of them, until they are fully funded Rule 2: Embrace your true expenses, by creating accounts for each infrequent, but predictable expense (car repair, doctor’s bills, new computer, Christmas gifts) and assigning a portion of the money you currently have to each of them, until they are fully funded Rule 3: Roll with the punches, adapting to each month’s unique circumstances by pulling money from lower priority accounts to fund higher priority ones Rule 4: Age your money, by waiting as long as possible from the moment money comes in, to the moment it is spent, which creates a cash buffer for riding out fluctuations in income and expenses Engage with your money consistently, by making intentional decisions whenever money comes in about which accounts it should fund Once all accounts have been funded, do whatever you want with your money!
- The 5 Challenges of Becoming a Digital Nomad
- Emergent Strategy: Organizing for Social Justice
- Emergent Strategy (Affiliate Link), by adrienne maree brown.
- The Essential Requirements for Choosing a Notes App as Your Second Brain
- A Maker’s Ethos in the Era of Networked Attention
- But I believe that makers have something to offer the broader society in these dark days: an ethos that subordinates information consumption to the act of producing things of objective value. Being a maker today is a radical act. It means treasuring the insightful, the subtle, and the private, in a world that increasingly prizes only the novel, the sensational, and the public.
- Being a maker requires patience when we’ve been trained to switch our focus constantly. It calls for reflection when we’ve been trained to react. It asks us to revisit an idea again and again until we’ve truly distilled its essence, instead of refreshing a feed for the newest of the new.
- The Garden and the Stream: A Technopastoral
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Being plugged in is a good thing, and there is value in every kind of information stream, from Twitter feeds to philosophy books. A balanced information diet draws from many sources: short and long form, simple and complex, trivial and lofty, familiar and novel. The Informational Apocalypse has little to do with the sheer volume of information we’re consuming. It comes from a diet dominated by the informational equivalent of fast food.
- Applying the maker mindset to our online behavior and balancing our informational diet with more nourishing ingredients requires shifting our model of the social web, from a Stream to a Garden.
- The Stream is a constantly flowing, endless succession of “events.” It is not a distinct entity that you can look at, walk around, and examine at your leisure. You can only dive straight into it, feel it flowing around and through you, and feel the force of it hitting you. Everyone’s thoughts and actions in the Stream are collapsed down to a single timeline, curated according to the sole criteria of “engagement” and centered completely on the individual experience. The Stream is everywhere: social media networks are the obvious ones, but it’s also the notifications panel of your smartphone, email, Slack, and text messages. The Stream has become the dominant mode of social interaction via digital means. The Stream has created a global conversation of unprecedented proportions. But there is, of course, a dark side. Everything in the Stream is persuasion, argument, or advocacy. Everything is personal and very urgent. It’s exciting and invigorating. This makes it completely unsuited to many of the uses we put it to.
- Now imagine a different model for how we use the web: as a Garden. A Garden is a finite space, with integrated parts that evolve slowly and in relationship to each other. It is iterative, with each season arranging and rearranging things. The Garden is not collapsed down to a single path or sequence. There are many paths through the Garden, many possible meanings, and each time we walk through it we create new ones. We are constantly adding things to the Garden in a serendipitous way that allows many future, unpredictable relationships. In a Garden, it is pointless to ask whether the tree came before the bridge. They are related to each other in a timeless way, and this is true of everything in the garden. Each flower, tree, and bench is curated by the gardener so that visitors can have unique yet coherent experiences as they find their own way. The Garden is a sort of experience generator, capable of infinite expression and meaning.
- We’ve been using the web as an instantaneous publishing machine. But it can also be used as a library. You could have copies of every document, book, image, video, or webpage that you’ve found enlightening or interesting, in a form that you control directly. You can edit them, annotate them, add links to them, summarize, and share. These artifacts become tools to think with. This library of personal knowledge is yours to mold as you see fit. You can fill it not only with facts and authoritative answers, but with doubts, with questions, with tenuous connections you haven’t quite yet proven. On the public web, only the author has the authority to say what an idea is associated with. In your private library, your models have time to grow past infancy into whole new ways of thinking and acting. And once it’s ready, then you can share it. Not as a hot take on the news of the day. But as a thingified idea – a technique or theory or framework or product or service – that can stand on its own two feet and have an impact on the world.
- Everyone wants to play in the Stream, but it is those who build Gardens that will win the future.
- The Maker’s Guide to Content Curation
- One of the best ways to advance your career, create an extra income stream, or become an entrepreneur is by creating content. By “content” I mean tangible information that delivers value to others, delivered over the Internet. It could take the form of a blog post or a long-form essay, an instructional guide or a how-to video, an ebook or online course. Content is anything you make out of knowledge and ideas, either your own or those of others, that exists on its own as a stand-alone thing. Content typically has the goal of entertaining people, helping them learn something new, or giving them solutions to their problems without you having to be there.
- Why is creating content such an effective way to advance almost anyone’s career or business? Because it gets you started making things, without many of the risks that are normally required. You gain experience in all stages of the creation process, from first thinking of the idea, to outlining the main points, to trying out different approaches, to refining and editing your “product,” to final delivery. But you get to do all this learning without paying for expensive overhead, like a staff, office rent, or equipment. You don’t need to quit your job or spend years earning a new degree. Creating most kinds of content requires nothing more than a computer or a smartphone to get started.
- how do you start creating content if that’s not something you’ve done before? One of the best ways to start creating content is to curate content. Curation is the process of sorting through the vast amount of content from others that already exists, and picking and choosing the best or most interesting items.
- But choosing the items is just the beginning of a curator’s job. They also organize and present the items they are curating in a way that makes sense.
- Here are some other examples of things you can create as a curator: Curated news feed: find the best sources of news on a particular topic, and filter only the best ones for others Diagrams, infographics, other visuals: make a map or diagram showing the best tools, websites, events, or products for a particular hobby or activity, and how they relate to each other Comparison tables: if you’ve done the research comparing the options in an industry or niche hobby, create a table showing how they compare Crowdsourced toolkits: talk to the leading experts in a niche and ask them for their favorite tools, and summarize the results Guides: if you understand an industry or a field, create a “guide” that shows people who the major players are, or what the best sources of insights are Curated video channels: collect the best videos on a topic and share them on your YouTube channel, with some commentary on why you think they’re so good Expert directories: create a list of the top experts in a field for people to follow Web page showcase: publish a collection of the best websites, or individual web pages for a particular topic Slideshows: create a slide presentation of the best examples or models, and upload it to a site like Slideshare Learning curriculum: make a “curriculum” of the best sources of learning for your field, along with some commentary on how people should use them and in what order Review videos: make short videos reviewing or critiquing works or products in your field, adding your perspective and personality to the mix Event guides: make a calendar or directory of the best events (concerts, festivals, conferences, meetups, trade shows) you’ve found Open questions list: share a list of the most interesting or important open questions in your field, to help newcomers orient to the current landscape Galleries: publish a collection of the best images you’ve encountered, along with links to their creators’ pages
- All these formats ultimately boil down to different combinations of text, images, and video, which can be delivered and monetized in different ways: Create a PDF and sell it directly on your website using Gumroad Start a blog on WordPress and charge for some of the articles using Memberful or Patreon Publish your work for free and take donations using Paypal Publish a course on Teachable or Thinkific and charge for access Create a profile on Clarity and charge by the minute for phone calls, using your content to market your expertise Create a paid email newsletter using Revue and distribute it via Mailchimp Set up an online forum using Discourse and charge for access
- Even if you never plan on sharing content with anyone, you still need to know how to curate content for yourself. The only way to escape the tsunami of information overload is by making intentional decisions about what to pay attention to, and what to ignore. Curation has evolved from a specialized profession, to a simple matter of staying informed about your field, and ultimately being more effective at your job.
- Austin Kleon’s Show Your Work
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Daniel Pink’s To Sell is Human
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Brendon Burchard’s The Millionaire Messenger
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- The 7 Pillars of Content Curation
- There are 7 core pillars I’ve settled on: Create a repository of valuable, pre-selected material Learn (and fail) in public Weave the personal and the objective Provide value back to the people you curate Always be pitching something Feed and tune your network Curate for yourself
- 1. Create a repository of valuable, pre-selected material This is probably the most fundamental lesson, not only for content curation but for knowledge work in general. It’s impossible to curate effectively just by sharing things on social media as you come across them. There’s no chance that you’ll know whether something is “the best” if you’re evaluating it in isolation. The value you provide is putting it into a broader context or narrative. And that requires collecting things in a repository before sharing them.
- Start by collecting a small set of valuable sources and personal insights for your own use. As it gains in size and value, start opening it to friends and colleagues. Eventually, you’ll have so much material that you can create “virtual exhibitions” for sharing publicly, which can be nothing more than websites, image galleries, or downloadable PDFs.
- 2. Learn (and fail) in public One of the best ways of thinking about curation is that you are “open-sourcing your learning process.” Pick something that you would really like to learn, and make a commitment to learning it in public, including your mistakes. By sharing your learning journey, you create an audience and a community around your learning, at times providing encouragement and other times commiseration. Seeing that others can benefit from your mistakes makes it much easier to recover from them, to push forward, and to take on bigger challenges than you would on your own.
- Show Your Work
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- As soon as you learn something, no matter how small, you can turn around and share it with others. This helps you test your understanding, surface doubts or weak points, and gives you an excuse to package up helpful resources like reading lists or walkthrough videos. These resources will be the perfect reference materials for your future self.
- 3. Weave the personal and the objective Most people share either purely personal updates of no durable value (what they ate for lunch, their workout outfit, or a rant on the topic of the day), or completely objective, but boring factoids (a newspaper article, a link to a website, or a quote from a book with no explanation). As a curator, you should split the difference, sharing content that has inherent value for others, while also adding your own interpretation or commentary. You want to get people used to hearing and valuing your take on the subject, apart from the plain facts.
- Kleon has a wonderful set of questions to get you started in the curation game: Where do you get your inspiration? What sorts of things do you fill your head with? What do you read? Do you subscribe to anything? What sites do you visit on the Internet? What music do you listen to? What movies do you see? Do you look at art? What do you collect? What’s inside your scrapbook? What do you pin to the corkboard above your desk? What do you stick on your refrigerator? Who’s done work that you admire? Who do you steal ideas from? Do you have any heroes? Who do you follow online? Who are the practitioners you look up to in your field?
- 4. Provide value back to the people you curate As a curator, it’s easy to see yourself as a small fish, especially when comparing yourself to the celebrity experts you are covering. But don’t underestimate your importance – curators and critics are a critical piece of building influence online.
- How do you provide value to someone who has already seemingly “made it”? There are so many ways. Write them an honest testimonial or review, and post it somewhere that potential customers might see it. Quote or summarize their ideas, and link your readers to the original source. Compare and contrast their offerings with their competitors, which helps filter for people most likely to be served by them. Convert their content into new forms and share them, which will help it reach new audiences.
- 5. Always be pitching something
- In a world of fragmented attention, every email, text message, and phone call is a pitch for someone’s attention. Every action you want someone to take – to give you feedback on your draft, brainstorm solutions to a problem, design a website – is a pitch for their precious time, in competition with hundreds of other pitches they receive every day.
- 6. Feed and tune your network
- It’s easy to see the world of influencers and thought leaders and to think it’s a solitary affair. The spotlight of “personal branding” shines only on the individual, but in reality it is a community of creative people that produces great ideas and great works.
- Don’t see yourself as a solitary curator lobbing your ideas into the void. Think of yourself as the Head Gardener in charge of an “ecology of talent.” It’s not your job to make everything happen. It’s your job to synchronize an interesting group of people who are passionate about something, and to help them create something together. Your content is just an excuse for this group to form. Doing this work in collaboration with others who can appreciate it is the only thing that makes it sustainable or worth doing.
- 7. Curate for yourself Let’s loop back to the beginning, to curating a collection of knowledge for yourself. As much as I advocate providing value to others, I believe that for this process to truly be sustainable, it has to be inherently enjoyable for you. The harsh reality is that you probably won’t succeed. It’s just a numbers game.
- RandomNote: Building an Idea Generator
- Books like Antifragile, Seeing Like a State, and Incomplete Nature have given me a deep appreciation for the power of randomness to produce resilience, strength, and creativity.
- As our world gets more complex, chaotic, and unpredictable, this assumption gets riskier and riskier. The downsides of not benefitting from randomness become ever greater. That’s because the greatest breakthroughs usually come from connections that are unexpected, unusual, and unorthodox. When we impose too much order on our ideas, it is these very connections that slip through the cracks.
- One of the few things worth sending through the bottleneck is tasks that add capacity to the bottleneck. This is how flywheels are made.
- Building systems for externalizing your thinking is not about better, faster, stronger. It is about getting out of your own way, gaining more control by letting go of inferior forms of control.
- Desktop Zero: An Experiment on Clearing My Digital Workspace
- Tide Turners: A Workshop on Using Business to Fuel Spiritual Awakening
- The basic methodology that Joe teaches is called VIEW, which stands for Vulnerability, Impartiality, Empathy, and Wonder. But like all frameworks, the power is not in the framework, but in how each of these “modes of being” are embodied. The weekend was dedicated to experimenting for ourselves what it meant to stay “within the VIEW”, spread out over two days of conversations, exercises, and activities.
- A Productivity Expert’s Guide to Working with a Virtual Assistant
