# To Shake the Sleeping Self

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: Jedidiah Jenkins

- youth gets together his materials to build a bridge to the moon, or perchance a palace or temple on the earth, and at length the middle-aged man concludes to build a wood-shed with them. —HENRY DAVID THOREAU
- I have learned this for certain: if discontent is your disease, travel is medicine. It resensitizes. It opens you up to see outside the patterns you follow. Because new places require new learning. It forces your childlike self back into action. When you are a kid, everything is new. You don’t know what’s under each rock, or up the creek. So, you look. You notice because you need to. The world is new. This, I believe, is why time moves so slowly as a child—why school days creep by and summer breaks stretch on. Your brain is paying attention to every second. It must as it learns the patterns of living. Every second has value. But as you get older, and the patterns become more obvious, time speeds up. Especially once you find your groove in the working world. The layout of your days becomes predictable, a routine, and once your brain reliably knows what’s next, it reclines and closes its eyes. Time pours through your hands like sand. This equation has a crummy side effect: while our child brains are absorbing the ways of the world…mislabeled patterns of survival get swept in as we grow. Bad examples. Wrong thinking. Mistaken assumptions. They get caught in the flow of time through adolescence and carried into adulthood, buried beneath everything else. You watch your dad fly into a rage while driving, and your little brain logs it away. You overhear your mom talking about hell, and something rearranges in your head. A building block placed so deep and quickly covered. We show up as adults, confused by our own thinking, and with time running out. But travel has a way of shaking the brain awake. When I’m in a new place, I don’t know what’s next, even if I’ve read all the guidebooks and followed the instructions of my friends. I can’t know a smell until I’ve smelled it. I can’t know the feeling of a New York street until I’ve walked it. I can’t feel the hot exhaust of the bus by reading about it. I can’t understand the humility of walking beneath those giant buildings. I can’t smell the food stands and the cologne and the spilled coffee. Not until I go and know it in its wholeness. But once I do, that awakened brain I had as a kid, with wide eyes and hands touching everything, comes right back. This brain absorbs the new world with gusto. And on top of that, it observes itself. It watches the self and parses out old reasons and motives. The observation is wide. Healing is mixed in. This kind of attention is natural to a child. To an adult, it must be chosen. The trick is: knowing when we are in fact adults, and when attention is asleep.
- The youth gets together his materials to build a bridge to the moon, or perchance a palace or temple on the earth, and at length the middle-aged man concludes to build a wood-shed with them. —HENRY DAVID THOREAU
- If you were a suburban kid like me, you probably grew up in a school system that wants you to go to college and choose a major and go straight into a job and a marriage and a mortgage. It gives you rungs of achievement: a degree, a wife, a house, kids, golf—whatever—and makes you think these things give life meaning. “Collect them all and win!” But the big fancy adults preach the opposite as well. They say, “fall in line” and then, in the same breath, “think different, take risks!” We are told, “follow your passion” and “stay hungry,” at every commencement and graduation speech. This mixture of school and risk is the holy cocktail of American ideals, and for those rare beacons of exceptional success, it turns their life stories into fables. But for ordinary folks, it is a difficult road to walk. Be sensible, but be wild. Be ordered, but be free. Be responsible, but take risks.
- This practical optimism gave me the worldview that life had many paths, all there in front of me always. The factor that I overlooked was the finiteness of time. This concept is invisible to a child. Kids may know logically that they will one day be old, but they can’t feel it. It sounds like a rumor. The carefree timelessness of my youth was rattled in my twenties. A kind of panic set in. Time became visible. Each choice I made began to feel more and more final, as if every choice was the death of all the others. Millions of doors were locking behind me as I passed them in the hallway. I felt that age thirty—adulthood—was coming like winter. Am I missing out? Am I making the right decisions? Am I becoming the person I want to be? It often dawns too late that we have only one life, only one path, and the choices we make become the story line of our lives.
- As thirty approached, and “youth” was passing into “adulthood,” the terrible reality of time hit me like a wet rag. I looked back on my twenties and realized that every time there was a crossroads, I took the first and safest path. I did just what was expected of me, or what I needed to do to escape pain or confusion. I was reactive. I didn’t feel like an autonomous soul. I felt like a pinball.
- I couldn’t have said it then, but now I know: my soul was afraid of dying. Not simply from loss of salvation, but from loss of self. If I really was “loved by God, a friend of God,” I wanted true friendship. Friends do not walk blindly, one behind the other. They walk shoulder-to-shoulder. I wanted clarity from my friend. To hear answers to my questions.
- When you don’t know what to do, you travel. You go out and see. You have to rattle the bed, shake yourself out.
- I wanted to start my thirties like I started life: wide awake. I didn’t have kids. I didn’t have a mortgage. I felt like this was my last chance to crawl into the driver’s seat of my life.
- They went on their spirit quest. And now I was going on mine. Who was I to think I had come to this idea completely on my own? As my mom began cautioning me to the dangers of cycling across Mexico, my mind was off somewhere else, thinking about destiny and the pre-ordering of things. How so often we become our parents, whether we like it or not. I had walked right into Mom and Dad’s shadow without noticing.
- That first day we rode toward Reedsport, along the coast and past tall pine trees and the occasional house. The day was sunny and beautiful and full of nervous laughter. Weston rode shirtless with no hands most of the afternoon, which would soon become his general uniform and style. His old cheap bike rattled in its imperfections, but it seemed to work. My new bike was heavy and strong. We were loving it, braiding back and forth as we rode, flowing like happy salmon up a river. Taking up the road, getting honked at, cussing at nothing and cracking up. We found it was fun to swear at the perfect sky and trees. Just shouting curses at them.
- I wonder if the old explorers and bold nomads of the past had this chemical nature to their brain. A foolish hope that the other side of the mountain wouldn’t kill them.
- Weston rode in front of me. His natural pace was stronger than mine. On a long, straight stretch, he pulled back next to me and wanted to talk. “Think we could get our trip sponsored?” he asked. “By who, like a company?” “Yeah. You’re writing about it. I can write about it, and I think a lot of people want to do what we’re doing. We could get a bike company or a camping company to give us money.” “That’s not a bad idea. But how? Do you know anyone?” “I’ve made pitch decks before, in my New York life. That would be rad.” “I thought you didn’t believe in money?” I smiled as I said it. “It’s not that I don’t believe in it. I want to dethrone it. Money is a currency, like a current, it should flow through me. Savings is stagnant. Feels wrong.” “Sounds like something Jesus would say.” “I mean, that’s why I gave all my shit away. Jesus said to the rich man, give it all up and follow me. Well, here I am. Don’t know if I’m following Jesus or just the truth behind what he said.”
- But the pace of biking, even these few days in, was having the intended effect: time crawled. Days were eternal. When it would rain, it rained forever. When the sun came out, it would be hot forever. I was a kid again. It was incredible, too, to watch the land change in slow motion. Riding a bicycle gives the land a realistic scale. You notice every seam and crease. The distances between towns and farms and the height of hills, and the way a road will follow a river or instead cut straight over a hill—you experience it all viscerally. You feel it all fitting together.
- I appreciated the accurate map my phone gave me. It alleviated the age-old explorer’s fear of getting lost. But I knew, even as I cycled south along the familiar Pacific Coast, that it cost me something else. It cost me a certain amount of wonder. Not only is every map perfectly drawn, but you can zoom your way into any beach cove in the world and practically steal the margarita out of someone’s hand. How do we explore a planet without secrets? I long for the days of lands we didn’t know existed, before the uncharted places all disappeared. That’s why I love looking at old maps, the ones with misjudged proportions and large sections labeled “UNKNOWN.” A few years back, some scientists were scouring satellite imagery of Mozambique when they noticed a green spot halfway up a mountain that didn’t exist on any map. It was the lost forest of Mount Mabu, home to animal species completely unknown to science and forests that had never been logged. No roads. Just a thick jungle sitting halfway up a mile-high mountain, the whole thing surrounded by plains. But of course, places like that are the exception today. With the Internet connecting us all, the rest of the world feels closer, less alien. But I think that’s only true in our minds. The Internet does not bring Argentina one inch closer to me than before. That’s part of why I craved this trip. Knowledge alone is like an unearned memory, mostly forgotten. Just facts and two-dimensional images. I wanted to physically discover the world, the old-fashioned way. To cross over mountains to see what was on the other side. To hear languages I’d never heard. To take the photographs from National Geographic and put them out in the weather of human imagination.
- There is a weird paradox in trying to live a meaningful life, one you will talk about and tell about. There is the present experience of the living, but also the separate eye, watching from above, already seeing the living from the outside. Darwin and Steinbeck wrote alone by hand in leather-bound books that only later found an audience. Still, they wrote as if to an audience, with the presumption that someone, one day, would read their private work. Is this so different from what I was doing on Instagram? It feels cheap to make the comparison, but maybe it’s not.
- That conversation had a big impact on me. Not just in humanizing my father, but in acquiescing to vice. I was in my twenties and fighting my vices, my sexuality, my manipulations…and here was my dad saying “I used to fight them. I quit that.” Maybe you’d think it was inspiring to hear that kind of freedom. It was terrifying. He had wrecked several families, and left daughters that wanted to strangle him. Ex-wives spoke of him like a hurricane they’d lived through. This was life? Quitting the fight and accepting yourself, flaws and all? I don’t want to accept my flaws. I was melancholy about it all for a while. Then, like God hand-delivered some hope into my hands, I was at a New Year’s party a few months later and a guy I didn’t know gave a toast. He was drunk but I think he said it right. “Be ever at peace with your neighbors, ever at war with your vices, and let every year find you a better man, that’s ol’ Benjy Franklin!” he said, and cheersed his beer, splashing it high. In a moment, my thoughts were beyond the party, floating above us. “Ever at war with your vices.” It didn’t say “let each year have you conquering a new vice.” No. It wasn’t about winning. It was about fighting. Continuing the project of improvement. The intention and effort was what built character. Not success. That changed a lot of things for me. I think it kept me from kissing boys for another four years, thinking that was a vice I had to fight forever. I think it also kept me from nihilistic meltdown. It was a double-edged sword.
- I wondered for a moment if I had gotten on my bicycle to escape my family. Then I thought, “No, I love these idiots. This mess is what made me. I just need to control my doses. It’s easy to overdose and get sick.”
- I had seen and tasted home. It was still there. But I had dethroned it from my infatuated desire in Mexico. I could return to the bike, knowing that all the comforts of home would be waiting for me when I was ready. I was also reminded of what I was looking for. A shaking-off of that film over my body I feel at home. Of confusion. Of self-loathing. Of constriction. I had to peel it back and see myself clean of what I had been told.
- The night before we left, we picked a seafood restaurant and enjoyed a big dinner together. Jordan, ever the experience creator, had asked us each to bring a Hafiz poem to read aloud. We drank our wine and prepped ourselves for the hike of our lives with poetry from the Persian mystic. I read one of my favorites. Even after all this time, The Sun never says to the Earth, you owe me, look what happens with a love like that, it lights the whole world. My friends said, “Read it again!” I did, delighting in its simplicity. Everyone had it memorized by the time the second reading was over. The poem felt so true, it came into the mind and sat down in a chair that had always been there, empty and waiting.
- Annabelle was talking it out, trying to bring the threads together. “Saying I am Christian doesn’t make sense for me anymore. But saying that something else is right or that there is nothing doesn’t make sense either. I have found more comfort and have felt a greater faith in something bigger than me, I have felt a bigger hug from the universe by rejecting the obsession to call it something. To name it. Maybe there is life after. Maybe there isn’t. Maybe it’s Jesus. Maybe it’s a giant oak tree. Maybe it’s energy. Maybe it’s stardust. Maybe we just shut off. But not calling it something certain has opened my heart more than when I was Christian, feeling like I was the lucky one who got to hear Jesus’s name and thus be accepted into the club. And quitting that limited idea, that the truth is so small, has given me deeper curiosity in the universe, my world, and the people around me. I love them more. I love everything more. Because I don’t see anyone else as right or wrong, we all just are. The not knowing feels so much bigger and more exciting and mystical and grand and beautiful than whatever words humans strung together to describe It, God, and how you attain It.”
- Mount Fitz Roy (the mountain range on the Patagonia clothing company’s logo),
- I was alone now and happy to be alone. Which, for Mr. Social Jedidiah, sounds odd. But it exposes a different side of me. Traveling alone, you get to be whoever you want. I don’t mean lie. I mean you get to be a blank slate. You can’t leave behind your skin color, or your height, or the handsomeness or homeliness of your face. But you can leave your story behind. If you’ve broken hearts, the new place doesn’t know. If you’ve lost trust in people and yourself, the new place doesn’t know. If everyone thinks you love Jesus, but you never really have figured out what you believe, the new place doesn’t care. It may assume you have it all tied nicely in a bow. All your thoughts and histories. Just feeling like your past isn’t a vice to hold you in place can be very freeing. Feeling like your family and the expectations and the traditions and the judgments are absent…it can fill your veins with possibility and fire.
- I thought of the power of storytelling, how exposure to this story of a trans woman was rewiring my brain. How Will & Grace had changed my young life. How encountering firsthand my sexuality had rewired the brains of some of my straight friends. Exposure to human stories reminds us that we’re all human. I mean real exposure. Listening, hearing. Not pointing from across the room. Engaging. And most of us are just trying to make it day by day without hurting anyone else. I still look at photos from that stretch of road and remember the sound of Terry Gross’s voice, of Jill Soloway’s calm surgery on my mind.
- Ferguson and Black Lives Matter and Transparent and transgendered people and the Bible and my mom and my sexuality and Terry Gross and Ebola. And this bird, unaware of it all. Looking for some roadkill, probably. It was not thinking about identity or gender or going extinct. It hungered for dinner and hungered for a mate. That’s it. I wish, I thought.
- I started walking on ahead again, letting my thoughts drift back over my trip, thinking how far I’d come, wondering whether or not I had changed at all. I had. I knew I had. But how? These walkabouts, these rites of passage, these spirit quests are meant to transform. We want to meet Jesus on the road, to be stopped in our tracks by a white light or a burning bush. I didn’t get any of that. I got the erosion of the shoreline of a river, one pebble at a time. I wanted to change. I wanted to be born different. To be replaced and born again. New. Forgotten and remade. I don’t know how that happens. I guess you have to completely erase your past, which I wasn’t ready to do. So I carried it with me, no matter how hard I ran from it. Clunking up the trail in my boots, I was making great headway. By now, the girls were somewhere up ahead, out of my view, and my mom was somewhere behind. These stunning monoliths of Torres del Paine would mark the true end of my journey. The trip felt like forever, but also here I was, in the present, with the moment rushing past me as though I were a stone in a creek. Time didn’t quite move like I’d thought. I had wanted to slow it down. I wanted to be aware of every moment passing, in reflection and contemplation. I wanted to leave my office life in order to feel time passing in some more holy way, holding it in my fingers and studying each minute like a prayer bead. But that isn’t how we experience life. The first miles in Oregon, I had been self-conscious in the extreme. I had felt my knees and hands and breath. On our bikes, Weston and I rushed through the pungency of sea foam and evergreen, crazy with euphoria, sure the newness of it all would be eternal. But then we slid into living the trip, and my awareness dulled into routine. I had been reborn into a different life, a different normal. The bicycle, the camping, the two-lane highways, the people and cultures had become patterns I could predict. I had wanted slowness, but I got life.
