# Writing to Learn

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: William Zinsser

- I wrote this book to try to ease two fears that American education seems to inflict on all of us in some form. One is the fear of writing. Most people have to do some kind of writing just to get through the day—a memo, a report, a letter—and would almost rather die than do it. The other is the fear of subjects we don’t think we have an aptitude for. Students with a bent for the humanities are terrified of science and mathematics, and students with an aptitude for science and mathematics are terrified of the humanities—all those subjects like English and philosophy and the arts that can’t be pinned down with numbers or formulas. I now think that these fears are largely unnecessary burdens to lug through life.
- This book is a personal journey in which I confronted some of my own fears and lived to tell the tale. What started me on it was my interest in the trend in American schools and colleges called “writing across the curriculum,” whereby writing is no longer the sole possession of the English teacher but is an organic part of how every subject is taught. It’s an idea I like very much. It establishes at an early age the fact that writing is a form of thinking, whatever the subject.
- But every discipline has a literature—a body of good writing that students and teachers can use as a model; writing is learned mainly by imitation.
- Clear writing is the logical arrangement of thought; a scientist who thinks clearly can write as well as the best writer.
- Writing and thinking and learning were the same process.
- the common thread is a sense of high enjoyment, zest and wonder. Perhaps, both in learning to write and in writing to learn, they are the only ingredients that really matter.
- 1. Hermes and the Periodic Table
- Frank Boyden
- I’ve become a clarity nut. I’ve also become a logic nut. I’m far less preoccupied than I once was with individual words and their picturesque roots and origins and with the various fights over which new ones should be admitted into the language. Those are mere skirmishes at the edge of the battlefield; I will no longer man the ramparts to hurl back such barbarians as “hopefully.” What does preoccupy me is the plain declarative sentence. How have we managed to hide it from so much of the population? Far too many Americans are prevented from doing useful work because they never learned to express themselves. Contrary to general belief, writing isn’t something that only “writers” do; writing is a basic skill for getting through life. Yet most American adults are terrified of the prospect—ask a middle-aged engineer to write a report and you’ll see something close to panic. Writing, however, isn’t a special language that belongs to English teachers and a few other sensitive souls who have a “gift for words.” Writing is thinking on paper. Anyone who thinks clearly should be able to write clearly—about any subject at all.
- I’ve not only met a wide variety of interesting people doing things that astonished and delighted me. I’ve found that their ideas were never so specialized that I couldn’t grasp them by writing about them or by editing someone else’s writing about them: by breaking the ideas down into logical units, called sentences, and putting one sentence after another. Along the way I’ve also discovered that knowledge is not as compartmented as I thought it was. It’s not a hundred different rooms inhabited by strangers; it’s all one house. Hermes and the periodic table are equally its household gods, and writing is the key that opens the door.
- 2. Writing Across the Curriculum
- As baggage I would be taking along a number of strong opinions on why so many Americans don’t learn to write and why they live in so much fear of trying.
- One of them has to do with English teachers. Under the American system, they are the people who teach our children to write. If they don’t, nobody will. They do it with dedication, and I hope they’ll be rewarded, if not here on earth, at least in heaven, for there’s almost no pedagogical task harder and more tiring than teaching somebody to write. But there are all kinds of reasons why English teachers ought to get some relief. One is that they shouldn’t have to assume the whole responsibility for imparting a skill that’s basic to every area of life. That should be everybody’s job. That’s citizenship.
- Another reason is that it’s not what most English teachers want to do. Their real subject is literature—not how to write, but how to read: how to extract meaning from a written text. That’s what they were primarily hired to teach and what they were trained to teach.
- Students should be learning a strong and unpretentious prose that will carry their thoughts about the world they live in.
- Another powerful element in learning to write is motivation. Motivation is crucial to writing—students will write far more willingly if they write about subjects that interest them and that they have an aptitude for.
- What also gets imparted in those classes is fear. The fear of writing is planted in countless people at an early age—often, ironically, by English teachers, who make science-minded kids feel stupid for not being “good at words,” just as science teachers make people like me feel stupid for not being good at science.
- The hard part, as in swimming, is to take the plunge. The water looks so cold. Can it be warmed up? I think it can. The way to begin is with imitation.
- Writing is learned by imitation. I learned to write mainly by reading writers who were doing the kind of writing I wanted to do and by trying to figure out how they did it.
- But nobody will write well unless he gets into his ear and into his metabolism a sense of how the language works and what it can be made to do.
- Another is that the essence of writing is rewriting. Very few writers say on their first try exactly what they want to say.
- H. L. Mencken said that “0.8 percent of the human race is capable of writing something that is instantly understandable.” He may have been a little high. Beware of dashing. “Effortless” articles that look as if they were dashed off are the result of strenuous effort. A piece of writing must be viewed as a constantly evolving organism.
- Finally, in the national furor over “why Johnny can’t write,” let’s not forget to ask why Johnny also can’t learn. The two are connected. Writing organizes and clarifies our thoughts. Writing is how we think our way into a subject and make it our own. Writing enables us to find out what we know—and what we don’t know—about whatever we’re trying to learn. Putting an idea into written words is like defrosting the windshield: The idea, so vague out there in the murk, slowly begins to gather itself into a sensible shape. Whatever we write—a memo, a letter, a note to the baby-sitter—all of us know this moment of finding out what we really want to say by trying in writing to say it.
- Probably every subject is interesting if an avenue into it can be found that has humanity and that an ordinary person can follow. Writing was such an avenue—perhaps, in fact, the main route.
- Lewis Thomas,
- Stephen Jay Gould.
- Douglas R. Hofstadter,
- Maybe, in fact, it’s time to redefine the “three R’s”—they should be reading, ’riting and reasoning. Together they add up to learning. It’s by writing about a subject we’re trying to learn that we reason our way to what it means.
- 3. A Liberal Education
- I never stopped to ask, “Who is the typical Yale alumnus? Who am I editing for?” One of my principles is that there is no typical anybody; every reader is different. I edit for myself and I write for myself. I assume that if I consider something interesting or funny, a certain number of other people will too. If they don’t, they have two inalienable rights—they can fire the editor and they can stop reading the writer.
- Meanwhile I draw on two sources of energy that I commend to anyone trying to survive in this vulnerable craft: confidence and ego. If you don’t have confidence in what you’re doing you might as well not do it.
- Two years later I happened to call Ruff and he mentioned that he was about to go to Venice to play Gregorian chants on his French horn in St. Mark’s cathedral at night when nobody else was there. He said it was a dream that went back thirty years to his student days at Yale, when his professor was the composer Paul Hindemith. Hindemith was obsessed by the relationship between music and science—his hero was the astronomer Johannes Kepler—and he was particularly excited by the music that came out of St. Mark’s basilica in the 1500s and 1600s, when Venice was the center of the musical world. The church’s remarkable acoustics inspired many composers—notably, the Gabrielis, Zarlino and Monteverdi—to create an important new style of polyphonic music. “Hindemith showed us that that music was a crucial bridge to everything that followed,” Ruff said. “It was also the music that spoke most directly to me. I loved the luxurious sound that the Gabrielis achieved in their polychoral compositions, which were played and sung antiphonally from opposite lofts in St. Mark’s. Ever since then I’ve wanted to know what that sound is like.” As for why he wanted to play Gregorian chants, Ruff said it went back to a concert that the singer Paul Robeson once gave at Carnegie Hall. To show that the folk music of many disparate countries has a common source, Robeson sang an East African tribal chant, a thirteenth-century Slovakian plain chant and an American Negro spiritual that were almost identical. Robeson explained that the Abyssinian church and the church of the Sudan were once part of the Eastern church of Byzantium. Thus African music found its way into the Byzantine liturgy, which later filtered out into Europe and colored the Gregorian chants of the early Roman Catholic Church. “So what I’ll be playing in St. Mark’s,” Ruff told me, “is sacred music that has been played in that church since the Middle Ages. And because those chants are also at the core of my spirituals I’m going to play some of them, too.”
- Whenever I embark on a story so overloaded with good material I despair of ever getting to the end—of covering all the ground I know I’ll need to cover to tell the story right. In my gloom it helps me to remember two things. One is that writing is linear and sequential. If sentence B logically follows sentence A, and if sentence C logically follows sentence B, I’ll eventually get to sentence Z. I also try to remember that the reader should be given only as much information as he needs and not one word more. Anything else is a self-indulgence. Prior knowledge of the subject, incidentally, isn’t a requirement; only the ability to arrange information in narrative order. Readers may well have thought I was an expert on the Venetian school of music. In fact I had never heard of the Venetian school of music or the Gabrielis until Ruff told me he was going to Venice, and I didn’t learn any other details until I flew there and met him at a café overlooking the Grand Canal. The trip was instant education—sufficient, at least, to enable me to tell my story to other generalists like myself.
- After that came the hard part: wrestling my new-found education into a narrative that moved logically from A to Z. The only thing I knew at the beginning was how I wanted the article to end: “The sacristan unbolted the door and gave us a warm Italian goodbye and we stepped out into the crowded streets of Venice.” But every preceding sentence was slow labor: the steady accretion of detail and the equally steady removal of whatever I had put in that I realized wasn’t doing necessary work or that the reader could figure out for himself. (I had learned by long travail a far from obvious lesson: Readers must be given room to bring their own emotions to a piece so crammed with emotional content; the writer must tenaciously resist explaining why the material is so moving.) Only when the job was over did I enjoy it. I don’t like to write, but I take great pleasure in having written—in having finally made an arrangement that has a certain inevitability, like the solution to a mathematical problem. Perhaps in no other line of work is delayed gratification so delayed.
- So much for the acoustics of St. Mark’s and the carpentry of writing. I’ve told the story because this is a book about process: the process of transmitting information clearly and simply. Only by repeated applications of process—writing and rewriting and pruning and shaping—can we hammer out a clear and simple product.
- 4. Writing to Learn
- The Art of Thinking, by Vincent Ruggiero, and Reasoning, by Michael Scriven.
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- The process also enables me to see how their mind worked. By having them describe how they arrived at a result I can comment on it, and they can make use of my comment when they go back to the experiment. There’s a feedback that isn’t possible when the teacher just grades from numerical answers. Revising helps the students to rethink.”
- I thought of all the subjects where the teacher never gets this inside look, where students are graded solely on the basis of a right or a wrong answer. I don’t only mean hard sciences, like physics, that deal in numerical answers. The humanities and the social sciences also rely heavily on tests that measure a student’s learning by what he knows, not by how he got to know it: multiple-choice exams and “short-answer questions.” Economics, for example, is a discipline that rests finally on numbers and projections and probabilities—“answers,” as they might be loosely called. But the future economist should be as accountable as the future chemist for describing the steps that took him to his numerical result, and the economics teacher should be no less eager to read about the trip.
- Where does writing figure in all this? Writing is a tool that enables people in every discipline to wrestle with facts and ideas. It’s a physical activity, unlike reading. Writing requires us to operate some kind of mechanism—pencil, pen, typewriter, word processor—for getting our thoughts on paper. It compels us by the repeated effort of language to go after those thoughts and to organize them and present them clearly. It forces us to keep asking, “Am I saying what I want to say?” Very often the answer is “No.” It’s a useful piece of information.
- I got them reading the essays of Victor Weisskopf and books like Loren Eiseley’s The Immense Journey, Stephen Jay Gould’s Ever Since Darwin and Thomas Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.”
- I asked Professor Brew what he thought of the “comp/lit” double grade that many English departments use to distinguish between how a paper is written and what it says. “I don’t approve of it,” he told me, “because it emphasizes the split. Writing is not divisible.” I was greatly cheered to hear this truth affirmed by a professor of English. Professors of English are by no means unanimously delighted to see “their” subject—writing—parceled out to teachers beyond the tribal walls. Chemistry teachers! Geography teachers! Many English teachers would rather hold on to the keys. Why, they ask, can’t they correct a chemistry paper for its writing and let the chemistry teacher correct it for its chemistry? The answer, of course, is that an act of writing is an act of thinking—an organic compound, as the chemists would say. There’s little point in having a teacher clean up the messy syntax in a chemistry paper if he can’t also clean up the messy chemistry. The indivisibility of language is what gives writing its authority and its majesty.
- 5. Crotchets and Convictions
- The artist Paul Klee once told his students that “art is exactitude winged by intuition.” I like that equally as a definition of good writing.
- Once again I was struck by one of the miracles of the cognitive process—that the act of writing will summon from the buried past exactly what we need exactly when we need it. Memory and intuition and chance associations will always generate a certain percentage of what any writer writes. The remainder is generated by reason.
- Therefore, for the purposes of this book, I’ll generalize outrageously and state that there are two kinds of writing. One is explanatory writing: writing that transmits existing information or ideas. Call it Type A writing. The other is exploratory writing: writing that enables us to discover what we want to say. Call it Type B. They are equally valid and useful.
- We are a society paralyzed by the inability to convey routine information—the inability of the executive to explain company policy in a memo to the staff, of the employee to explain his new idea in a proposal to the boss, of the bank to explain its “simplified” new bank statement to the customer, of the manufacturer to explain in a consumer manual how its product works, of the health and insurance professions to explain in a brochure how to get reimbursed for being sick, of the educator to explain in a letter how the school is educating our children, of the Internal Revenue Service to explain on its new tax form how to fill it out.
- Type A writing is what most people need to get through the day, both as writers and as readers. Its sole purpose is to inform; it has no deeper content that the writer will discover in the act of writing.
- My advice to Type A writers begins with one word: Think! Ask yourself, “What do I want to say?” Then try to say it. Then ask yourself, “Have I said it?” Put yourself in the reader’s mind: Is your sentence absolutely clear to someone who knows nothing about the subject? If not, think about how to make it clear. Then rewrite it. Then think: “What do I need to say next? Will it lead logically out of what I’ve just written? Will it also lead logically toward where I want to go?” If it will, write the sentence. Then ask yourself, “Did it do the job I wanted it to do, with no ambiguity?” If it did, think: “Now what does the reader need to know?” Keep thinking and writing and rewriting. If you force yourself to think clearly you will write clearly. It’s as simple as that. The hard part isn’t the writing; the hard part is the thinking.
- Type B writing—exploratory writing—requires no such cogitation, no prior decisions about which road to take; the road will reveal itself.
- Meaning, in fact, doesn’t exist until a writer goes looking for it.
- What makes good writing good and bad writing bad? Here are some notions that are important to me.
- FICTION AND NONFICTION
- This book has nothing to do with fiction. I’m dealing only with nonfiction, or factual writing, by which I mean all the kinds of writing that harness the world we live in and are therefore accountable to the truth. By contrast, the fiction writer—the writer of novels and short stories—is accountable only to his art.
- I like Catch-22, Gravity’s Rainbow and Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, for instance, because the authors of those three surrealistic novels—Joseph Heller, Thomas Pynchon and Robert Pirsig—invented their own rules, knowing that the old ones wouldn’t do the job they had in mind.
- But as readers of fiction we have no right to say that the author’s method was “wrong.” We can only say it didn’t work for us.
- No such immunity is granted the nonfiction writer. He can do all kinds of things wrong. He is endlessly accountable: to the facts, to the people he is writing about, to his “quotes,” to the mood, to the ethical nuances of the story. He is also accountable to his readers. They won’t put up with being delayed, lost, confused, bored or taken down unnecessary trails by failures of craft.
- Fiction may still be worshiped on the slopes of Parnassus as the higher form. But writing good nonfiction is in many ways harder and more exacting work.
- INFORMATION AND NOISE
- One of the most helpful books I’ve read recently is Grammatical Man: Information, Entropy, Language, and Life, by Jeremy Campbell. It’s the story of “information theory,” a science that wasn’t born until World War II but whose laws have governed us since the first grunt.
- I found it consoling after all these years to learn that writers are up against nothing less than the fundamental anarchy of the universe; entropy, prince of disorder, is sprinkling noise on everything we write. Ambiguity is noise. Redundancy is noise. Misuse of words is noise. Vagueness is noise. Jargon is noise. Pomposity is noise. Clutter is noise: all those unnecessary adjectives (“ongoing progress”), all those unnecessary adverbs (“successfully avoided”), all those unnecessary prepositions draped onto verbs (“order up”), all those unnecessary phrases (“in a very real sense”).
- Information is your sacred product, and noise is its pollutant. Guard the message with your life.
- OBSCURITY
- Probably the most engaging advice on obscurity comes from E. B. White, in Strunk and White’s The Elements of Style, a book every writer should read once a year. “Although there is no substitute for merit in writing,” White says, “clarity comes closest to being one.
- VOICE AND TONE
- Long after Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! has come and gone, books like Lewis Thomas’s Lives of a Cell and Douglas Hofstadter’s Gödel, Escher, Bach will still be around, their authors remembered as men of wisdom and stature. Thomas and Hofstadter aren’t trying to be a pal to the reader; they’re trying to write good English. They know that the English language, reverently used, will carry any load.
- Moral: There are no cheap substitutes for the best.
- BREVITY
- In writing, short is usually better than long. Short words and sentences are easier for the eye and the mind to process than long ones, and an article that makes its case succinctly is the highest form of courtesy to the reader.
- Most pieces can be cut by 50 percent without losing any substance.
- JARGON
- Jargon is the lingo of people in specialized fields who have infected each other with their private terminology and don’t think there’s any other way to say what they mean. Somewhere they forgot about the mother tongue. There’s almost no subject that can’t be made accessible in good English.
- More often jargon consists of special terms that every occupation has found it necessary to invent. Used with restraint, they aren’t jargon; they are the working tools of a particular field, and if they serve a specific need we have no trouble learning new ones overnight: words like “amniocentesis” and “gentrification” and “superconductivity.” The trouble arises when jargon becomes a crutch—when its users become so dependent on their private terminology that they claim they can’t express themselves in any other way.
- THE ILLITERACY OF THE ELITE
- If clear writing is one of the foundations of a democratic society, don’t count on getting it from men and women with a college degree. Ivy League alumni magazines are awash with letters so grammatically squalid that they barely make sense. Clean-up time at this toxic dump has to start at the top.
- KILLER NOUNS
- Probably there isn’t a writing teacher (including me) who hasn’t assailed his students with George Orwell’s rendering into modern sludge of the verse from Ecclesiastes about the race not being to the swift. That’s not going to stop me from citing it again. The verse goes like this: I returned and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.
- LIFESAVING VERBS
- One way to take the mush out of concept nouns is to turn them into active verbs. Verbs are the strongest tools a writer is given, because they embody an action.
- Active verbs are stronger than passive verbs, because they propel a sentence forward. They also enable us to picture who did what, because they require a pronoun or a noun: “I,” “we,” “she,” “you,” “boy,” “girl.” Seeing a pronoun or a noun and an active verb together, we visualize a specific event that occurred at a specific moment. Passive verbs have no such energy or precision: ACTIVE: I saw the boys skating on the pond. PASSIVE: The boys were seen skating on the pond. [By whom? When? How often?]
- Active verbs are a writer’s best friend. Not every concept noun can be turned into an active verb. But how many people are even trying?
- VISIBLE DETAIL
- Writing is not unlike the schoolroom period called “show and tell.” The writer should not only tell a story; he should try to make the reader see what he is writing about.
- As Mailer demonstrates, active verbs are ideal for this kind of work; they force us to witness an event. But nouns are equally pictorial and helpful. I’m not talking (needless to say) about concept nouns. I mean the thousands of simple nouns, like “house” and “chair” and “earth” and “tree,” that denote the objects of everyday life and the properties of the world we live in.
- Unlike the long concept nouns, which tend to be of Latin origin and to end in “ion,” these are Anglo-Saxon words—short, blunt, homely and infinitely old. They are words that are in our bones and that resonate with emotions, whether we want them to or not. A writer who uses these nouns makes instant contact with the humanity of his reader by giving him a familiar picture.
- ENJOYMENT
- Achieving a decent piece of writing is such a difficult task that it often strikes the reader as having been just that: a task. It accomplishes its purpose, and perhaps we shouldn’t ask for anything more. But we do. We wish the writer had had a better time—or at least had given us that impression.
- Then he said: “The reader has to believe that the writer is feeling good.”
- Now, thinking of that feat, I realize that audacity was only part of what Perelman was talking about. He was also talking about courage. Humor is the most perilous of writing forms, full of risk; to make a vocation of brightening the reader’s day is an act of continuing gallantry. He was also talking about energy. Energy is the divine spark in creative work. We know right away when we are in its presence—we can’t hold Bach or Mozart down, or Picasso, or Mark Twain, or Frank Lloyd Wright, or Louise Nevelson, or Fred Astaire, or Lucille Ball, or Toscanini or Norman Mailer or Tom Wolfe. They sweep us along in the current of their life force. We seldom stop to think about the effort they made to switch it on and crank it up every morning. But what Perelman was finally talking about was craft. Writing is a craft, and a writer is someone who goes to work every day with his tools, like the carpenter or the television repairman, no matter how he feels, and if one of the things he wants to produce by 6 P.M. is a sense of enjoyment in his writing, he must generate it by an act of will. Nobody else is going to do it for him.
- IN SHORT.
- 6. Earth, Sea and Sky
- One of the few other adults who lived in our Gothic quadrangle when I was master of Branford College at Yale was a distinguished professor of geology, fast approaching the emeritus years, named John Rodgers.
- James Geikie’s book: Mountains, Their Origin, Growth and Decay (1913).
- One scientist who manages to simplify these immensities for me is James Trefil, a professor of physics and author (speaking of invisible phenomena) of the popular From Atoms to Quarks.
- Trefil has written a book called Meditations at 10,000 Feet: A Scientist in the Mountains
- Alan Paton’s Cry, the Beloved Country.
- A Sand County Almanac, by the conservationist Aldo Leopold,
- There’s a newspaper in Colorado that I admire, for instance, called High Country News—“A Paper for People Who Care About the West”
- Rachel Carson’s The Sea Around Us.
- 7. Art and Artists
- But art is a language that has to be studied like any other language.
