# A Text Renaissance

## Meta Data

Source:  
Author: Venkatesh Rao

## Highlights

### Highlights

- There is a renaissance underway in online text as a medium. The Four Horsemen of this emerging Textopia are:
  Roam, a hypertext publishing platform best understood as a medium for composing conspiracy theories and extended universes.
  Substack, a careful and thorough ground-up neoclassical reconstruction of the age-old email newsletter.
  Static websites, built out of frameworks like Jekyll or Gatsby (full disclosure: a consulting client).
  And finally, Threaded Twitter, a user-pioneered hack-turned-supported feature that has wonderfully revitalized the platform.
- The text renaissance is an actual renaissance. It’s a story of history-inspired renewal in a very fundamental way: exciting recent developments are due in part to a new generation of young product visionaries circling back to the early history of digital text, rediscovering old, abandoned ideas, and reimagining the bleeding edge in terms of the unexplored adjacent possible of the 80s and 90s.
- On the surface, Roam looks like a cross between a slightly weird wiki and a note-taking tool like Evernote. It’s not. It implements a few key features of 1980s vintage hypertext visions — block-level addressability, transclusion (changes in referenced blocks being “transfer-included” wherever they are cited), and bidirectional linking — that utterly transform the writing experience at the finger-tips level. You end up organizing high-level structure as you work at fleshing out low-level chunks of information, because the UX collapses high and low-level thinking into a single behavior.
  So you can write, structure, organize, refactor, bundle/unbundle, all in a single subconsciously learnable flow. You don’t have to think consciously about this: it gets compiled down to finger-tip skill as you use it. This is the sort of product I was dimly groping around for, and trying to build at Xerox 10 years ago. I wasn’t smart enough to pull it off, and back then, the technology wasn’t there either anyway. Now the tech is there, and there’s someone on the scene smart enough to pull it off.
- Email today is now less a communications medium than a communications compile target. It’s a clearinghouse technology. It’s where conversations-of-record go, where identity verification happens, where service alerts accumulate, and perhaps most importantly for publishers, where push-delivered longform content goes by default. It is distributed and federated, near universal, and is not monopolized by a single provider. Now that a constellation of other product categories have hived off around it in the last two decades, it’s finally finding its own true nature.
- In the early tens, while blogging reigned and RSS was not dead yet as a consumer distribution mode, and twitter hadn’t become dominant in the link economy, email newsletters for writing, as opposed to marketing, languished. They became associated with desperation: spammy-hacky popups on sites trying to get your email by any means necessary. Permission marketing evolved from Seth Godin’s original noble conception to “Permission” marketing in scare quotes.
  The reversal began with TinyLetter, but that got bought out by Mailchimp (and began to be viewed, correctly, as business-model compromised).
  Enter Substack. Substack, by eschewing the marketing communications (MarCom) market entirely, and focusing on writers people actually wanted to read, reversed the perceptions of the technology. Instead of trying to scam people into giving you “permission” to send them emails, Substack said, why not charge them to subscribe.
- Static websites are of course, the original kind of website. The qualifier static wasn’t even necessary in the first few years as that was the only kind of website you could build.
- In the 90s, we had CGI (Common Gateway Interface) based dynamic websites. They were a horror to build and maintain (I worked for a major CGI-Perl era site briefly in 2000-01). CGI eventually evolved into the modern database driven website. Commonly using descendants of the LAMP stack (Linux, Apache, MySql, Perl/PHP). Today the webserver might be Nginx instead of Apache, and the scripting layer might be Ruby or Python, and you might be running in some sort of container in the cloud instead of a Linux server you administer.
  But through nearly 25 years of evolution, the basic idea of a destination content website hasn’t really changed from a publisher point of view.
  Websites have just gotten a lot more reliable, stable, and high-performance. And for most purposes, you don’t need to roll your own website. You can use something like WordPress that implements a content management solution using the LAMP stack.
  And high-end technologies like CDNs (content delivery networks) are now a standard part of serious websites.
  This website, for instance, runs on a hosted WordPress platform called WPEngine that costs an arm and a leg (more on that in a bit), but is high-performance, secure, includes a seamlessly integrated CDN, and doesn’t crash under big traffic spikes like the one I just experienced with the Internet of Beefs article. In the early years, ribbonfarm would promptly crash under mildly viral conditions. Today I pay an order of magnitude more for hosting, but basically don’t have to do any thinking or mucking about in the backend to keep things running. We’ve come a long way.
- The new static webpage model takes a fundamentally different approach. The name is deceptive. Though the page delivered is a clean, simple static page, the backend is, if anything, a hyper-dynamic stream.
  Frameworks like Gatsby (founded by my longtime friends and new clients Kyle Matthews and Sam Bhagwat) essentially assemble pages together on the fly from all over the place, via a just-in-time compilation stream piping into React. The result is blazing-fast websites that can be changed easily, but look static. In particular, they can evolve too fast to run off a “backend database” as such. Instead they do something that looks more like using the entire cloudy internet as a backend. The “server” behind a Gatsby style page is more like a temporary cache and assembly/staging area than a traditional backend.
- If you’ve been thinking Twitter is a cesspool of civilizational decay, prepare to change your mind. It’s pretty much the center of the renaissance.
- A big part of the reason Twitter has ascended to this position is threading. The idea (originally known as tweetstorming) was invented as a simple workaround hack by Marc Andreessen back in 2014, to get past the 140 character limit. But a bunch of young pioneers rapidly turned it into a creative medium in its own right. Visakan Veeraswamy is among the best known at this point (he’s publishing a whole book of his threads which I suspect is a first for the medium), but there are several others. At some point Twitter grudgingly started supporting threading as a feature (and in the process took control of how threads were displayed, an annoying but reasonable move). Services like Threadreaderapp emerged to turn threads into longform documents.
- This is the current state of the art. Threading is clearly a very rich and complex medium, with a huge amount of potential.
  We’ve barely scratched the surface of what’s possible. If an almost-accidental event with some random volunteer hacking can lead to such a rich expression of creativity in both content and container, there’s a lot more to explore and develop here. All the hacks people pulled together suggest that if the technology comes together in the right way, Threadapalooza could become the template of a whole new kind of virtual conference. If I were 20 years younger, I’d be trying to create a startup to build such a product.
- One reason all this is happening now is that a set of interesting enablers are emerging simultaneously, on technological, economic, and cultural fronts.
- On the technological front, we have: React, Graph databases, next-generation languages like Clojure (the language Roam is written in), and a shifting perception of Javascript: instead of being viewed as a janky front-end language, it is now viewed as a mature “low-level” language, available on both frontend and backend (via Node) that’s more a compile target than something you hand-code in. These technologies in turn rest on a new generation of hardware and cloud infrastructure.
- Machine-learning driven technologies that can really soup up text are almost here. Two in particular are worth watching:
  Automated transcription: The podcast boom (and to a lesser extent, the video boom on YouTube) currently exists almost entirely as an artifact of two social phenomena: commuting and low-cognitive-demand chores, both of which call for a low-information-density ambient background information flow. It is the conversational equivalent of elevator music (convo-muzak? convozak?). When transcription gets good enough, it will create another feedstock for text, and the backward coupling will create a whole new subculture within audio/video, of creators who are solving for higher-information-density text distribution in addition to/instead of, ambient convozak.
  Machine-generated text: GPT-2 is a genuine breakthrough in text-generation. I’ve been trying, with the help of programmer collaborators, to turn myself into a bot for years now, and finally, with GPT-2, an algorithm can sort of generate tweets that sound like me (ht Will Darwin, here’s how he did it). It’s fascinating and surreal, and I can’t wait to properly integrate that into my writing somehow.
- Stripe is important because it allows content technologies and media to be built ground-up with monetization philosophy in place at the foundational level. It doesn’t have to be a janky bolted-on piece of the puzzle.
- The positive impact of PayPal (and the PayPal mafia) is widely recognized. I think we’re only now beginning to recognize the negative externalities created by it being the main payment processor for 15 years. It took the rise of a better product to show us what good payment integration can do to media.
- Most attention in the consumer media technology world tends to focus on the latest, most sophisticated media that we can create with networked computing technologies. Right now, the mainstream technological frontier lies in encrypted p2p messaging (WhatsApp, Signal, Telegram) and short-form video (TikTok).
  VR, AR, deepfakes (as a creative medium), and natural-language text-generation (in particular the deep learning algorithm known as GPT-2) are inching ever closer to the mainstream.
  Podcasting is approaching a sort of maturation plateau with the rise of both sophisticated toolchains and maturing automated transcription technologies (such as otter.ai). It’s where blogging was in 2012 or so.
- Text though, is definitely going through a renaissance, and as primarily a producer of text, that’s what interests me the most. What comes out the other end may or may not look anything like blogging. It might be a case of a New Blogging as an Elder Medium in an explosion of new textual media. Or it might be a case of Blogging is Dead, Long Live Blogging. Or something else altogether.
