# Call Sign Chaos

## Meta Data

Source:  manual 
Author: Jim Mattis, Bing West

## Highlights

### Highlights

- **Type:** #[[__ 🟦  Reference Note]] | [[Leadership]]
- **Author:** [[Jim Mattis]]
- **Highlights:**
    - Three Cs of Leadership:
        - My early years with my Marines taught me leadership fundamentals, summed up in the three Cs
        - **Competence:**
            - The first is competence. Be Brilliant at the Basics. ==**Don't dabble in your job; you must master it.**== That applies at every level as you advance. Analyze yourself. Identify weaknesses and improve yourself. If you're not running three miles in eighteen minutes, work out more; if you're not a good listener, discipline yourself; if you're not swift at calling in artillery fire, rehearse. Your troops are counting on you. Of course you'll screw up sometimes; don't dwell on that. The last perfect man on earth died on a cross long ago-just be honest and move on, smarter for what your mistake taught you.
            - **Battles, conventional or irregular, turn on the basics of fire superiority and maneuvering against the enemy.** Fire and maneuver-block and tackle-decide battle. The Corps exists to win battles. That is inseparable from making Marines who stand for its values in tough times. **Anything that doesn't contribute to winning battles or winning Marines is of secondary importance.**
            - Regrettably, too many of the men I've seen killed or wounded failed to perform the basics. War is fraught with random dangers and careless missteps. Clear orders and relentless rehearsals based on intelligence and repetitive training build muscle - **not once or twice, but hundreds of times.** **Read history, but study a few battles in depth.** ==**Learning from others' mistakes is far smarter than putting your own lads in body bags.**==
            - Physical strength, endurance, calling in fire, map reading, verbal clarity, tactical cunning, use of micro-terrain-all are necessary. You must master and integrate them to gain the confidence of troops. A good map-reading lieutenant is worthless if he can't do pull-ups.
        - **Caring:**
            - Second, caring. To quote [[Teddy Roosevelt]], "Nobody cares how much you know, until they know how much you care."  In a family, you watch out for your younger brother. You're interested in him, how he grows, how he learns, who he wants to be. ==**When your Marines know you care about them, then you can speak bluntly when they disappoint you.**== They are young, but they did volunteer for the Marines, so don't patronize them. They know they're not in a life insurance company. **Be honest in your criticism, but blow away the bad behavior while leaving their manhood intact.**
                - "Nobody cares how much you know, until they know how much you care." - [[Teddy Roosevelt]]
            - Show no favoritism. **Value initiative and aggressiveness above all.** It's easier to pull the reins back than to push a timid soul forward. Consistently maintain a social and personal distance, remembering that there is a line you must not cross. But you should come as close to that line as possible-without surrendering one your ounce of your authority. **You are not their friend. You are their coach and commander, rewarding the qualities essential to battlefield victory.**
            - You get to know them as individuals-what makes them tick and what their specific goals are. One is striving to make corporal, another needs a letter of recommendation for college, another is determined to break eighteen minutes for three miles. **A Marine knows when you are invested in his character, his dreams, and his development. Men like that won't quit on you.**
        - **Conviction:**
            - Third, conviction. This is harder and deeper than physical courage. Your peers are the first to know what you will stand for and, more important, what you won't stand for. Your troops fast. State your flat-ass rules and stick to them. They shouldn't come as a surprise to anyone. At the same time, leaven your professional passion with personal humility and compassion for your troops. ==**Remember: As an officer, you need to win only one battle for the hearts of your troops. Win their hearts and they will win the fights.**==
            - Conviction doesn't mean you should not change your mind when circumstance or new information warrant it. ==**A leader must be willing to change and make change.**== **Senior staffs sometimes need pruning**. It's easy to get into a bureaucratic rut where things are done a certain way because they're done a certain way. That seems absurd when you read it in print -- but it's the norm in large organizations. ==**Every few months, a leader has to step back and question what he and his organization are doing.**==
        - Competence, caring, and conviction combine to **form a fundamental element-shaping the fighting spirit of your troops**. ==**Leadership means reaching the souls of your troops, instilling a sense of commitment and purpose in the face of challenges**== so severe that they cannot be put into words.

- My early years with my Marines taught me leadership fundamentals, summed up in the three Cs.
  The first is competence. Be brilliant in the basics. Don't dabble C in your job; you must master it. That applies at every level as you advance. Analyze yourself. Identify weaknesses and improve yourself. If you're not running three miles in eighteen minutes, work out more; if you're not a good listener, discipline yourself; if you're not swift at calling in artillery fire, rehearse. Your troops are counting on you. Of course you'll screw up sometimes; don't dwell on that.
  The last perfect man on earth died on a cross long ago-just be honest and move on, smarter for what your mistake taught you.
  Battles, conventional or irregular, turn on the basics of fire superiority and maneuvering against the enemy. Fire and maneuver-block and tackle-decide battle. The Corps exists to win battles. That is inseparable from making Marines who stand for its values in tough times. Anything that doesn't contribute to
- winning battles or winning Marines is of secondary importance.
  Regrettably, too many of the men I've seen killed or wounded failed to perform the basics. War is fraught with random dangers and careless missteps. Clear orders and relentless rehearsals based on intelligence and repetitive training build muscle-not once or twice, but hundreds of times. Read history, but study a few battles in depth. Learning from others' mistakes is far smarter than putting your own lads in body bags.
  Physical strength, endurance, calling in fire, map reading, verbal clarity, tactical cunning, use of micro-terrain-all are necessary.
  You must master and integrate them to gain the confidence of troops. A good map-reading lieutenant is worthless if he can't do pull-ups.
- Second, caring To quote Teddy Roosevelt, "Nobody cares how much you know, until they know how much you care." In a family, you watch out for your younger brother. You're interested in himhow he grows, how he learns, who he wants to be. When your Marines know you care about them, then you can speak bluntly when they disappoint you, They are young, but they did volunteer for the Marines, so don't patronize them. They know they're not in a life insurance company. Be honest in your criticism, but blow away the bad behavior while leaving their manhood intact.
  Show no favoritism. Value initiative and aggressiveness above all. It's easier to pull the reins back than to push a timid soul forward. Consistently maintain a social and personal distance, remembering that there is a line you must not cross. But you should come as close to that line as possible-without surrendering one your ounce of your authority. You are not their friend. You are their coach and commander, rewarding the qualities essential to battlefield victory.
  You get to know them as individuals-what makes them tick and what their specific goals are. One is striving to make corporal, another needs a letter of recommendation for college, another is determined to break eighteen minutes for three miles. A Marine knows when you are invested in his character, his dreams, and his development. Men like that won't quit on you.
- Third, conviction. This is harder and deeper than physical courage. Your peers are the first to know what you will stand for and, more important, what you won't stand for. Your troops
- fast. State your flat-ass rules and stick to them. They shouldn't come as a surprise to anyone. At the same time, leaven your professional passion with personal humility and compassion for your troops. Remember: As an officer, you need to win only one battlefor the hearts of your troops. Win their hearts and they will win the fights.
  Competence, caring, and conviction combine to form a fundamental element-shaping the fighting spirit of your troops. Leadership means reaching the souls of your troops, instilling a sense of commitment and purpose in the face of challenges so severe that they cannot be put into words.
- I had learned in the fleet that in harmonious, effective units, everyone owns the unit mission. If you as the commander define the mission as your responsibility, you have already failed. It was our mission, never my mission. The thirty-eight recruiters were my subordinate commanders. "Command and control," the phrase so commonly used to describe leadership inside and outside the military, is inaccurate. In the Corps, I was taught to use the concept of
- "command and feedback."You don't control your subordinate commanders' every move; you clearly state your intent and unleash their initiative, Then, when the inevitable obstacles or challenges arise, with good feedback loops and relevant data displays, you hear about it and move to deal with the obstacle. Based on feedback, you fix the problem. George Washington, leading a revolutionary army, followed a "listen, learn, and help, then lead,"
  sequence. I found that what worked for George Washington worked for me.
  It's all about clear goals and effective coaching.
- I found staff visits and daily or weekly visits-reducing reports and getting out more to see units on their turf-essential to build.
  ing trust. And "hand-con," maintaining relationships, takes time to build, and can be lost in a second-and you may not get a chance to get it back. High morale is reflected by the absence of self-pity.
  Resourceful leaders do not lose touch with their troops. A leader's job is to inculcate high-spirited, amiable self-discipline. Leaders must always generate options by surrounding themselves with bright subordinates and being catalysts for new ideas.
- Command and feedback is a fundamentally different approach than imposing command and control for coordinating teams to work optimally. Critical to the command and feedback approach is the speed of information sharing and decentralizing decisionmaking. While having commanders physically forward with the
- troops is important, commanders cannot be everywhere, even while their influence must permeate the entire organization. This meant that imaging the troops in advance through potential upsets and decision points allowed them to anticipate what they must take in stride. Using "eyes" officers to supplement reporting from field commanders locked in combat, we turned out decisions faster than our adversary, permitting us to turn inside the enemy's decision loop. When I fight an enemy, my frontline troops quickly sense enemy strengths and weaknesses. Taking immediate advantage of an enemy's misstep is essential, and the resulting feedback allows an organization's decisions and actions to outpace those of the enemy. But for all this, decentralized decision-making ultimately gave us the edge.
  We can decentralize decision-making and gain relative speed over the enemy, however, only if conditions are set to enable subordinate success. Where decisions are decentralized, subordinateunit-leader discipline must be of a higher level than when decisions are made solely at senior levels. This is due to the need for aligning independent decisions in a concert of actions. The glue aligning these decisions is the commander's clearly articulated intent, firmly setting the operation's aim.
- The other necessary condition is the education and training ofz the subordinate leaders to ensure they have the skills necessary to take intelligent initiative. Various techniques for mental imaging proved enormously useful to ensuring that my intent was widely, comprehended. After all, subordinate leaders are as likely as senior officers to make bad calls if they are not properly prepared for the increased responsibility. Training to enable "brilliance in the basics" and educating junior leaders to make sense out of the unexpected (as friction, uncertainty, and ambiguity are war's elementals and nothing ever goes according to plan) are the down payment for subordinate initiative. Only with sufficient investment can an organization expect, even demand, subordinate initiative as the price for attaining a leadership position.
- To turn this broader Marine philosophy of fighting into my own authentic leadership style, I drew upon historical influences and the Vietnam veterans whose experiences imparted a healthy dose of reality. I had been shaped and sharpened by the rough whetstone of those veterans, mentored by sergeants and captains who had slogged through rice paddies and jungles, fighting a tough enemy every foot of the way. I learned then and I believe now that everyone needs a mentor or to be a mentor-and that no one needs a tyrant. At the same time, there's no substitute for constant study to master one's craft. Living in history builds your own shock absorber, because you'll learn that there are lots of old solutions to new problems. If you haven't read hundreds of books, learning from others who went before you, you are functionally illiterate you can't coach and you can't lead. History lights the often dark path ahead; even if it's a dim light, it's better than none. If you can't
- be additive as a leader, you're just like a potted plant in the corner of a hotel lobby: you look pretty, but you're not adding substance to the organization's mission.
- I used "touchstones" such as "No better friend, no worse enemy" and "First, do no harm," among others, leavened with history's enduring lessons, to guide subordinates who would face situations requiring them to make instantaneous decisions on their feet. I often chose phrases from antiquity, purposely using broad themes and objectives, leaving maximum opportunity for subordinates to use their initiative and aggressiveness. Clearly stating the operation's purpose and sparsely outlining the methods we'd used, I closed my intent by explaining our desired end state.
- Reading is an honor and a gift from a warrior or historian who-a decade or a thousand decades ago-set aside time to write.
  He distilled a lifetime of campaigning in order to have a "conversation" with you. We have been fighting on this planet for ten thousand years; it would be idiotic and unethical to not take advantage of such accumulated experiences. If you haven't read hundreds of books, you are functionally illiterate, and you will be incompetent, because your personal experiences alone aren't broad enough to sustain you.Any commander who claims he is "too busy to read"
  is going to fill body bags with his troops as he learns the hard way.
  The consequences of incompetence in battle are final. History teaches that we face nothing new under the sun. The Commandant of the Marine Corps maintains a list of required reading for every rank. All Marines read a common set; in addition, sergeants read some books, and colonels read others. Even generals are assigned a new set of books that they must consume. At no rank is a Marine excused from studying. When I talked to any group of Marines, I knew from their ranks what books they had read. During planning and before going into battle, I could cite specific examples of how others had solved similar challenges. This provided my lads with a mental model as we adapted to our specific mission.
- To instill that trust, the Marine Corps demanded that, as young officers, we learn how to convey our intent so that it passed intact through the layers of intermediate leadership to our youngest Marines. For instance, you may say, "We will attack that bridge in order to cut off the enemy's escape." The critical information is your intent, summed up in the phrase "in order to." If a platoon seizes the bridge and cuts off the enemy, the mission is a success.
  But if the bridge is seized while the enemy continues to escape, the platoon commander will not sit idly on the bridge. Without asking for further orders, he will move to cut off the enemy's escape. Such aligned independence is based upon a shared understanding of the "why" for the mission. This is key to unleashing audacity.
  Developing a culture of operating from commander's intent demanded a higher level of unit discipline and self-discipline than issuing voluminous, detailed instructions. In drafting my intent, I learned to provide only what is necessary to achieve a clearly defined end state: tell your team the purpose of the operation, giving no more than the essential details of how you intend to achieve the mission, and then clearly state your goal or end state, one that enables what you intend to do next. Leave the "how" to your subordinates, who must be trained and rewarded for exercising initiative, taking advantage of opportunities and problems as they arise.
  The details you don't give in your orders are as important as the ones you do. With all hands aligned to your goals, their cunning and initiative unleashed, you need only transparent sharing of information (What do I know? Who needs to know? Have I told them?) to orchestrate, as opposed to "control" or "synchronize," a coordinated team.
  Subordinate commanders cannot seize fleeting opportunities if they do not understand the purpose behind an order. The correct exercise of independent action requires a common understanding between the commander and the subordinate, of both the mission and the commander's intent of what the mission is expected to accomplish.
  #[[Commander’s Intent]]
- When you are engaged at the tactical level, you grasp your own reality so clearly it's tempting to assume that everyone sees it in the same light. Wrong. When you're the senior commander in a deployed force, time spent sharing your appreciation of the situation on the ground with your seniors is like time spent on reconnaissance: it's seldom wasted.
- To expect success every time is wishful Aing thinking, but we should default to supporting commanders who move boldly against the enemy. This time things worked out - thanks to Lacroix and his men. When things go wrong, a leader must stand by those who made the decision under extreme pressure and with incomplete information. Initiative and audacity must be supported, whether or not successful
- I was reminded of a pithy sentiment Field Marshal Slim wrote in World War II:
  "As officers," he wrote, "you will neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor smoke, nor even sit down until you have personally seen that your men have done those things. If you will do this for them, they will follow you to the end of the world. And, if you do not, I will break you."
- I took as a model the example of a chess master at a tournament who, after taking a single glance at the board, predicts the winner three moves hence. How could he do that? The economist Herbert Simon explained, "The situation [on the chessboard] provided a cue; this cue has given the chess master access to information stored in his memory; and the information provides the answer. Intuition is nothing more and nothing less than recognition."
- Regardless of rank or occupation, I believe that all leaders should be coaches at heart. For me, "player-coach" aptly describes the role of a combat leader, or any real leader.
- There's a profound difference between a mistake and a lack of discipline. Mistakes are made when you're trying to carry out a commander's intent and you screw up in the pressure of the moment. I'm a walking example of the Marine Corps giving second chances to those who make mistakes-I've made many-recognizing that my mistakes served as a bridge to learning how to do things right.
  But the Naval Service is the varsity, and a lack of discipline is not a mistake. In the Naval Service, consistent with the enormous authority granted to a commander, and the wide latitude and def
- erence they're given to exercise their judgment, if a ship strikes a shoal, the captain is relieved, even if he was asleep at the time and his subordinates were at the helm. Similarly, if lance corporals are not trained properly, their superiors must be held to account for their lack of leadership competence and professional supervision.
- I turned to first-rate minds on military transformation: Professor Colin Gray, Dr. Williamson Murray, Dr. Frank Hoffman, and Australian Lieutenant Colonel David Kilcullen. I consumed their writings and asked for their guidance. Eventually I settled on twenty-two books to guide me. I expanded my contacts with practitioners of strategic leadership. Most important among them were Generals Colin Powell, Tony Zinni, John Abizaid, Gary Luck, and George Joulwan, as well as others; statesmen like Henry Kissinger, George Shultz, and Newt Gingrich; and former Secretaries of Defense. They gave freely of their time. These three lines of effort allowed me to build a framework within which I could operate in the years to come as I dealt with transformation.
- Reviewing my self-assigned reading, one fact stood out repeatedly about militaries that successfully transformed to stay at the top of their game: they had all identified and defined to a Jesuit's level of satisfaction a specific problem they had to solve. The effort to define the military problems we had to solve in our time would consume a lot of my attention.
- "Your staff resents you," I said. "You're disappointed in their input. Okay. But your criticism makes that input worse, not better.
  You're going the wrong way. You cannot allow your passion for excellence to destroy your compassion for them as human beings."
  This was a point I had always driven home to my subordinates.
  "Change your leadership style." I continued. "Coach and encourage, don't berate, least of all in public."
- The underlying problem with NATO transformation was not individual personalities, though; it was, rather, a lack of energy and initiative, resulting from a process-driven culture. Entropy prevailed; process had replaced output. They had many papers about what NATO needed to do, but, reviewing them, I could detect no steps taken as the outcome of what looked like good thinking. Why was that? Part of the reason was that fighting in Afghanistan was consuming NATO's attention. Why spend time on future threats when you're fighting a present-day one? But, as with the Marine Corps, I didn't want America's allies to have tunnel vision. Eventually they'd be out of Afghanistan and facing different kinds of threats.
- Conviction doesn't mean you should not change your mind when circumstance or new information warrant it. A leader must be willing to change and make change. Senior staffs sometimes need pruning. It's easy to get into a bureaucratic rut where things are done a certain way because they're done a certain way. That seems absurd when you read it in print-but it's the norm in large organizations. Every few months, a leader has to step back and question what he and his organization are doing.
- Understanding what made this organization tick meant dissecting its culture, not just what was written down in its charter. Culture is a way of life shared by a group of people-how they act, what they believe, how they treat one another, and what they value. Peter Drucker, the business guru, criticized business executives for devoting too much time to planning, rather than understanding the nature of the corporation itself. As he put it, "Culture eats strategy for lunch." The output of any organization, driven by its culture, must reflect the leadership's values in order to be effective.
- Early in my tenure, I visited a brigade headquarters. On the bulletin board were slogans exhorting initiative, like DECIDE THEN ACT! SEIZE THE DAY! and JUST DO IT! These sounded inspiring, reflecting an ethos that valued initiative, until a battalion commander directed my attention to his commanding general's division-wide order. It prescribed the exact attire required for physical training that every soldier had to wear while working out-including the color of their safety belt. By prescribing such minutiae from the top down, the actual culture of the organization contradicted its own declarations and stifled any kind of real initiative. Initiative has to be practiced daily, not stifled, if it's to become a reality inside a culture. Every institution gets the behavior it rewards. We had to reward battlefield behavior, not what in an earlier time we called garrison Mickey Mouse, or worse.
  After I encountered numerous such instances of command from the top, I stood back to reflect. When asked how he would order his thoughts if he had one hour to save the world, Einstein sagely responded that he would spend fifty-five minutes defining the problem and save the world in five minutes. Well, how did JFCOM define the joint problem? What guiding vision had formed its culture over the past decade? I knew the service chiefs knew best how to guide the Army, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard, and Marine Corps in preparing for warfighting. But was JFCOM providing the same guidance for the joint team? The answer was no.
- Leaders must shelter those challenging nonconformists and mavericks who make institutions uncomfortable; otherwise you wash out innovation.
- One of my predecessors at CENTCOM, General Zinni, had taught me to break information into three categories. The first was housekeeping, which allowed me to be anticipatory-for example, munitions stockage levels and ship locations. The second was decision-making, to maintain the rhythm of operations designed to ensure that our OODA loops were functioning at the speed of relevance. The third were alarms, called "night orders. These addressed critical events-for instance, a U.S. embassy in distress or a new outbreak of hostilities. "Alarm" information had to be immediately brought to my attention, day or night.
- In our military, lack of time to reflect is the single biggest deficiency in senior decision-makers. If there was one area where I consistently fell short, that was it. Try as I would, I failed to put aside hours for sequestering myself outside the daily routine to think more broadly: What weren't we doing that needed to be done? Where was our strategy lacking? What lay over the horizon? I had fine officers working hundreds of issues, but a leader must try to see the overarching pattern, fitting details into the larger situation. Anticipating the second- and third-order consequences of policy decisions demanded more time than I was putting aside.
- From the classrooms of Quantico to the training fields to the battlefields, I winnowed information to what proved most beneficial in coming to grips with war's realities. From a leader's perspective, intent is the starting point. "Commander's intent" has a special meaning in the military that requires time and thought. A commander must state his relevant aim. Intent is a formal statement in which the commander puts himself or herself on the line. Intent must accomplish the mission, it has to be achievable, it must be clearly understood, and at the end of the day, it has to deliver what the unit was tasked with achieving. Your moral authority as a commander is heavily dependent on the quality of this guidance and your troops' sense of confidence in it: the expectation that they will use their initiative, aligning subordinate actions. You must unleash initiative rather than suffocate it.
