# The Great Mental Models Volume 2

## Meta Data

Source:  kindle 
Author: Shane Parrish and Rhiannon Beaubien

## Highlights

### Highlights

- ## Introduction
- The world is beautiful, fascinating, and full of curiosities, but it doesn’t have to be completely mysterious. Humans may not know everything about the world, and indeed it often feels like we have just scratched the surface, but we have figured out some fundamentals about how everything on this planet operates.
- In Storm in a Teacup: The Physics of Everyday Life, Helen Czerski tells the story of the Fram, a boat designed “to work with nature instead of against it.”1 In the late 1800s there was immense curiosity about the North Pole. But the ships that were sent to try to get there would get stuck in the ice of the Arctic, freezing in place. As the ice around the ships grew, it put immense pressure on the hulls, eventually breaking them apart. No one could get to the North Pole without dealing with ice, and the total amount of ice and corresponding pressure to be dealt with was essentially an unknown. No ship had the hull strength to deal with the upper limits of ice pressure possibility. A Norwegian scientist named Fridtjof Nansen came up with the idea for the Fram—a truly unique ship. “She had a smooth curvy hull, almost no keel, and engines and rudder that could be lifted right out of the water. When the ice came, the Fram became a floating bowl. And if you squeeze a curved shape like a bowl or a cylinder from below, it will pop upward. If the squeeze from the ice got too much, the Fram would just be pushed upward to sit on it.”2 Nansen did not try to improve on the design of existing boats. Instead, he let the reality of ice expansion determine the design of his ship. The Fram floated across the Arctic Ocean for the next three years, not quite making it to the pole, but collecting reams of valuable scientific data. She got closer to the pole than any ship previously and provided conclusive evidence that the Arctic was an ocean. All of this success was due to trying to answer one question, ‘How can I work with the world, not against it?” As Czerski concludes, “Instead of fighting the inexorable expansion of the ice, [the Fram] had used it to ride across the top of the world.”3
- Taking action that works with the world is more effective, less stressful, and ultimately more rewarding. We don’t waste our time fighting to accomplish the impossible.
- Nothing in life is to be feared, it is only to be understood. Now is the time to understand more, so that we may fear less. Marie Curie
- ## Relativity
- We often think someone is wrong because they see things from a different perspective than we do. Relativity helps us to understand that there is more than one way to see everything. That doesn’t mean everyone’s perspective is equally valid, only that we might not have the most complete view into a problem or situation.
- The science of relativity is best explained through two famous thought experiments—one conducted by Galileo and the other by Albert Einstein. Each describes a situation that demonstrates the reality of differing perspectives.
- In the 1630s, Galileo discovered that any two observers moving at constant speed and direction will obtain the same results for all mechanical experiments they perform.
- Galileo’s original thought experiment describes a scientist on a ship moving at constant velocity. The scientist is below deck with no portholes to give him a frame of reference for the movement of the ship. When this scientist drops a ball from waist level, he will notice only the vertical movement caused by gravity. He will observe that the ball drops to the floor of the ship. However, there is also a horizontal movement that the scientist doesn’t perceive. Both the scientist and the ball are also moving the distance covered by the ship as the ball is falling to the ground.
- An outside observer, someone standing on a nearby beach or a fish in the water can detect the complete movement of the ball because their perspective is different. By being outside the ship, they see a more complete version of reality. The scientist on the boat would have to make a conscious effort to remember that both he and the ball are moving with the ship.
- In the early 1900s, Einstein used another famous thought experiment when developing his theory of special relativity, which linked mass and energy using the formula E=mc². This formula demonstrates that energy is equivalent to mass times the speed of light squared. With this theory, Einstein stated that the speed of light is fixed within any frame of reference moving at a constant velocity, and therefore there is no fixed frame of reference from which one can measure the physical laws.
- Einstein’s thought experiment to describe special relativity illustrated the concept that observers in relative motion experience time differently. This means that two events can happen simultaneously from one observer’s perspective and at different times from another observer’s perspective. Both are right. Here is the experiment: Imagine you are watching a train go by. Lightning strikes each end just as the train’s midpoint is passing you. The lightning strikes are each the same distance from you, so you correctly conclude that the two bolts of lightning hit the train at exactly the same time. Later on, you catch up with your friend who was on the train. “Crazy that two bolts of lightning struck your train at exactly the same time,” you say. “What are you talking about?” she responds. “The front of the train got hit by lightning first.” You dismiss her interpretation. After all, you witnessed the whole thing. But here is what was happening for her: She was sitting at the midpoint of the train. If the train had been stationary, she would have observed the two lightning strikes being simultaneous like you did. However, because the train was moving, the light from the rear strike had farther to travel to reach her. She perceived the light from the strike at the front first. So, she correctly concluded that the lightning strikes were not simultaneous; the one in front happened first. These are two valid interpretations of the same event. Both are correct. The difference arises because of the perspective of each person.
- The subjectivity of perspective
- You now know that you are always going to have an imperfect perspective. You will never be able to see everything at once. Nor will you be able to completely trust that everything you do see is viewed by others. What you see is useful but limited. The less willing you are to accept and acknowledge limitations, the less useful your perspective.
- You will always have limitations to your frame of reference that you need to account for in an effort to better understand reality. You must recognize what these limits are and, in situations where the risks are high or the outcomes important, take steps to augment your perception.
- This concept helps us understand that integrating multiple perspectives gives us a better view.
- The reality of multiple perspectives is critical to understanding the world and your place in it. We can only see so much. In concrete terms, relativity highlights a subjectivity of perspective that explains partly why eyewitness testimonies have lost their credibility over the years.
- Perspective Taking
- Perspective-taking in psychology refers to the ability to perceive a situation from an alternative point of view. We are not born with this ability.
- There are two broad types of perspectives that we learn: differing physical perspectives, such as that the view out of your neighbor’s window is different than yours; and conceptual perspectives, such as that people have different feelings or beliefs that in turn influence their perspectives.
- Rashomon, the classic Japanese film, is an excellent exploration of the differences in the testimonies of several eyewitnesses to a crime. A samurai is found murdered in a forest. A bandit is accused of the crime. During the subsequent trial, the bandit, the samurai—speaking through a medium—his wife, and a woodcutter who observed the whole incident each give testimony. Each story is different, partly due to the self-interest of each of the characters, and partly due to the fact that each can only understand the events that play out through a single perspective—their own.
- Through the eyes of others
- Given that you can’t go back in time to situate yourself differently, what can you do to augment your perspective? This is where thought experiments come in handy.
- When you see someone doing something that doesn’t make sense to you, ask yourself what the world would have to look like to you for those actions to make sense. While we all see our own version of events, the goal is to enlarge our perspective to be a closer representation of reality by removing some of the factors that cloud our judgment. One of the best ways to do this is by noticing and observing the details of what is going on around you.
- There is a fascinating story of six Muslim students landing in London in 1815, one of whom kept a diary of his observations and experiences.8 The story provides a gateway to exploring the effects of bias and how to look at the world through another’s eyes.
- One of the students, Mirza Salih, kept a diary. In his book The Love of Strangers, Nile Green translates and puts into context the experience of these students as they navigate Britain, based on this diary and letters that they wrote. It provides an interesting way to consider how relativity helps to understand perspective.
- We bring our sensibilities into what we see. The problem is, most of us usually forget this. We are so used to being on Einstein’s train that we forget it is there. But traveling to new places far outside our normal experiences can jolt us into remembering our train, seeing it in a new light, understanding better its size and shape, and remind us that not everyone is on it.
- Another story that drives home the point that considering others’ perspective can substantially enrich our own, is that of Rifa’a Rafi’ al-Tahtawi*, an Egyptian who traveled to Paris in the late 1820s and recorded in detail the minutiae of what he saw in his book An Imam in Paris.
- How other people frame something is their vantage point. It’s not an unobstructed description of reality, but rather their individual perspective. Making efforts to understand someone’s view helps you understand their frame, their set of beliefs and biases that guide how they see their world.
- The core concepts of relative perspective and framing have a broad application. When someone gives you something, an opinion, a report, an article, a plan, consider how it is framed. Who is involved in this information, and what do you know about their vantage point? Knowing the factors that influence how a person frames issues helps you understand their perspective and how you can use it to augment your own.
- Salih and al-Tahtawi’s experiences of trying to understand their own cultures by juxtaposing them against other cultures demonstrates the value of considering other perspectives and comparing them with your own. Namely, that you get a more complete picture of the context in which you are operating and where opportunities might be. This is why the publishing industry relies heavily on editors, and research needs peer review to be credible. Outside views combine to make a better product.
- Perspective often comes from distance or time. If you’re trying to solve a problem and you’re stuck, try shifting your vantage point.
- ## Reciprocity
- In physics, reciprocity is Newton’s third law, which states that for every force exerted by object A on object B, there is an equal but opposite force exerted by object B on object A. Every force involves the interaction of two objects where the force asserted by one is reciprocated with an equally powerful and directionally opposite force by the other object.
- In the natural world, this third law of Newton’s explains jet propulsion. The word propulsion comes from two Latin terms meaning “forward” and “drive”—propulsion is a force that drives an object forward.1 Jet propulsion works by forcing matter, such as gas produced by burning fuel, in one direction, leading to a corresponding movement of the vehicle in the opposite direction.
- Reciprocity can be summed up like this: when you act on things, they act on you.
- What we give
- Although the connection between good deeds and a good life isn’t perfect, there is a documented relationship between the two. Using the model of reciprocity can help us understand why people benefit themselves when they work for what they believe is good.
- The life of Norman Bethune,* a Canadian surgeon, is one that can teach us a lot about the nuances of reciprocity.
- In a paper on the health benefits of volunteering in adults, the authors explain, “The beneficial effects of volunteering on health outcomes have been well documented. Research has found that participation in voluntary services is significantly predictive of better mental and physical health, life satisfaction, self-esteem, happiness, lower depressive symptoms, psychological distress, and mortality and functional inability.”6 Multiple studies have demonstrated the positive consequences of volunteering that are conferred on the volunteer. We may volunteer for a variety of reasons, based on our interests, goals or values, but regardless, we reap health benefits when we do so.
- The research on volunteering makes it clear that when we give, we get. We improve our physical health; we feel better about ourselves and our place in the world. We evaluate our lives as having more meaning.
- « Many, many men have been just as troubled morally and spiritually as you are right now. Happily, some of them kept records of their troubles. You’ll learn from them—if you want to. Just as someday, if you have something to offer, someone will learn something from you. It’s a beautiful reciprocal arrangement. » J.D. Salinger 7
- Tit for Tat
- Tit for tat is a strategy which, according to game theory, is the most effective choice for iterated games based on mutual cooperation or defection.
- Both players benefit if they cooperate, but one benefits and the other loses out if only they defect, and both lose out to a lesser extent if they simultaneously defect.
- Under tit for tat, a player will begin by cooperating, then in subsequent iterations will replicate whatever their opponent did last time. So if their initial cooperation is punished with defection, they will then reciprocate in kind.
- However, straightforward tit for tat is not as effective as the strategy known as tit for tat with forgiveness. This strategy involves occasionally cooperating in the face of defection. It is easy for two opponents to get stuck in a cycle of mutual defection from which they cannot escape unless and until one decides to cooperate. If both are using tit for tat, a cycle of mutual cooperation will then commence.
- Life is an iterative and compounding game. In the words of Peter Kaufman, it pays to “go positive and go first.” Also, remember that people make mistakes. Assuming there is no maliciousness, it pays to forgive.
- Loss Aversion
- Loss aversion is one of the principles that govern the value of outcomes.
- Daniel Kahneman explains it like this: “When directly compared or weighted against each other, losses loom larger than gains.” According to Kahneman, people are willing to risk losing $100 for every $250 of potential gains.1 The loss aversion coefficient is 1:2.5.
- When it comes to reciprocity, we need to understand, “We are driven more strongly to avoid losses than to achieve gains.”
- The rise of the “win-win”
- In the physical world, the law of reciprocity works 100% of the time. The harder you punch a wall, the more force pushes against your fist, the more damage is caused to both you and the wall. In the biological world, reciprocity doesn’t have the same perfect record. However, it has been discovered to work much more often than not, and thus harnessing it has significant long-term benefits.
- Evolutionary biologists argue that our tendency to engage in reciprocal behavior is a natural product of evolution. You are more likely to survive if you receive help from others. And you are more likely to receive that help if you have offered assistance in the past.
- Humans engage in two types of reciprocity with each other: direct, which is “I help you and you help me;” and indirect, which is either a pay-it-forward concept, “I help you and then you help someone else,” or more about reputation building—“I help you, building a reputation as one who helps, so that someone else helps me in the future.” Both kinds work.
- Reciprocity based on self-interest is still reciprocity. Engaging in positive behavior to then be a receiver of positive behavior is about the long game.
- Over time, the likelihood of reciprocal interactions increases, and thus it’s a much better strategy to try to make them positive. The more people you help, the more people you will have willing to help you.
- Schadenfreude
- Schadenfreude is a German word that has the literal translation of “damage-joy” and the more nuanced translation of delight or satisfaction at another person’s misfortune or suffering.
- Schadenfreude is closely linked to our sense of reciprocity. We feel it strongest when someone’s misfortune seems earned, as penance for their misdeeds. No one of sound mind would feel joy at the sight of an elderly lady tripping up in the street or a dog getting its paw stepped upon. But when a homophobic politician accidentally tweets a link to gay porn? That’s when we feel a sense
- According to research, schadenfreude is tied to three things: aggression, rivalry, and justice.
- Become what you want to see in the world and it will be so. If you want an amazing relationship with your partner, be an amazing partner. If you want people to be thoughtful and kind, be thoughtful and kind. If you want people to listen to you, listen to them. The best way to achieve success is to deserve success. Small changes in your actions change your entire world.
- Czerski, Helen. Storm in a Teacup: The Physics of Everyday Life. New York: W. W. Norton and Company, 2016
    - **Tags:** #read
    - **Note:** .read
- Asimov, Isaac. “The Relativity of Wrong.”
- Descartes, Rene. Discourse on Method.
