- **Type:** #[[🟦 Reference Note]] #[[📥 Inbox]] | #Blockchain #Crypto #NEAR
- **Source:** https://near.org/blog/the-beginners-guide-to-the-near-blockchain/
- **Author:** [[Erik Trautman]]
- **Summary:**
    - 
- **Literature Notes:**
    - 
- **Highlights:**
    - This guide is intended to help anyone interested in ^^understanding what NEAR actually is^^. That includes new users, curious community members, prospective partners and new core contributors to the NEAR Collective.
    - **The Basics**
        - So what is NEAR (aka “the NEAR Platform”)?
        - NEAR is a ^^**decentralized development platform**^^ built on top of the **NEAR Protocol**, ^^**which is a public, sharded, developer-friendly, proof-of-stake blockchain**^^.
        - Put another way, ^^NEAR is like a public community-run cloud platform^^.  That mean^^s it is a highly scalable, low cost platform for developers to create decentralized apps^^ on top of.
        - Whereas most other “scalable” blockchains use approaches that centralize processing on high-end hardware to provide a temporary boost in throughput, ^^NEAR Protocol’s approach allows the platform’s capacity to scale nearly linearly up to billions of transactions in a fully decentralized way.^^
        - NEAR is being built by ^^the NEAR Collective^^, a global collection of people and organizations who are collaboratively building this massive open source project.
        - Everyone in this Collective is fanatically focused on enabling usability improvements for both developers and their end-users so the next wave of apps can cross the chasm to a more general audience that has thus far been unable to consistently work with blockchain-based apps built on today’s platforms.
        - Let’s be clear: ^^NEAR is not a side chain, an ERC20 token or a highly specialized task-specific blockchain^^… it is nothing less than ^^**a brand new and fundamentally reimagined layer 1 protocol designed to independently power the base of the emerging Open Web stack.**^^
        - **From 10,000 feet…**
            - The NEAR Collective is basically ^^building the infrastructure for a new Internet which makes it harder for giant companies to steal your data and for bad guy countries to shut it down.^^
            - You’ve heard of [Bitcoin](https://bitcoin.org/en/), that digital currency everyone thinks is only used by criminals and third-world dictators. Well, despite a really bad reputation and a lot of hiccups along the way, ten years later they still haven’t been able to kill Bitcoin so you know it’s built on very resilient technology. We’re basically trying to use that same kind of technology to power a brand new Internet which is just as hard to kill or screw up.
        - From 1,000 feet…
            - We aren’t building the only blockchain which is taking on the scaling and cost problems but NEAR has a team that’s all aces and we’re coming at this in a slightly different way.
            - To set the stage, ^^we’re building a “base-layer blockchain”, meaning that it’s on the same level of the infrastructure as projects like Ethereum^^, [EOS](https://eos.io/) or [Polkadot](https://polkadot.network). That means ^^everything else will be built on top of NEAR.^^
            - ^^It’s a general-purpose platform that allows developers to create and deploy decentralized applications on top of it.^^
            - A decent analogy is that it’s sort of like Amazon’s [AWS platform](https://aws.amazon.com/), which is where most of the applications you know and love host their servers, except the NEAR platform isn’t actually run and controlled by one company, it’s run and controlled by thousands or even millions of people. ^^**You can call it a “community-operated cloud” but we usually prefer to simply call it a “decentralized application platform.”**^^
    - **The Arc of Technology**
        - It’s worth checking in quickly with how we got here because it will help you understand the context of the current ecosystem.
        - ^^Bitcoin is the original “programmable money” or “digital gold”.^^ It has been doing a pretty good job of fulfilling those functions but ^^**its use so far as a more general-purpose computing platform (like we’re building) is mostly an accident.**^^
        - Unfortunately, ^^**transactions are very costly**^^ and, because this was definitely NOT what the Bitcoin platform was meant for, ^^**the functionality is very limited.**^^
        - ^^Ethereum, back in 2014, tried to directly address this use case by creating a platform that was, from day 1, intended to use the same blockchain technology to build a global virtual computer which any application could be built on top of.^^
        - So, if Bitcoin was really just a basic calculator, Ethereum was a fancy TI-83 graphing calculator on which you could write some interesting, if basic, games.
        - While it put lots of good ideas into place, ^^**it is also rather slow (14 transactions per second) and still quite costly for developers to use.**^^
        - ^^“Layer 2” scaling solutions, including “state channels” and “side chains”, have popped up to try and improve the performance and cost of these slower (but rather secure) platforms^^ by taking some of the work off the main chain and doing it elsewhere. They exist for both Bitcoin and Ethereum but haven’t achieved the adoption we hoped.
        - ^^The first serious challenger blockchains launched in 2017–2018^^ with a wide variety of approaches to helping the scaling problem. ^^They generally tried centralizing more of the hardware^^ (eg EOS) but most of the approaches are still ultimately bounded by a fixed limit because every single one of the “nodes” that make up the network are repeating the exact same work, whether there are 21 of them or 1,000. So these approaches have been able to achieve throughputs of thousands (or more) transactions per second but^^ often sacrifice decentralization^^ to do so.
        - ^^Next generation scalable blockchains like NEAR represent the new wave.^^ In this case, ^^**NEAR breaks free from the idea that every single node which participates in the network has to run all of the code because that essentially creates one big wasteful bottleneck and slows down all of the other approaches.**^^
        - To fix this, NEAR uses a technique called ^^**“sharding” **^^from the database world ([technical explanation](https://www.citusdata.com/blog/2018/01/10/sharding-in-plain-english/)) which ^^**splits the network so that much of the computation is actually being done in parallel**^^. This allows the network’s capacity to scale up as the number of nodes in the network increases so there isn’t a theoretical limit on the network’s capacity.
        - But it’s not all about scaling. In fact, for scaling to even be a benefit, developers need to be able to create apps that people actually use and current blockchains make this difficult on both the developer and the end-user.
    - **A few quick notes…**
        - There are a few kinds of projects that sort of fit into the landscape but won’t be covered much further here:
        - **Currencies**: Fundamentally, any token can operate as a currency because you can use it as a unit of account, a medium of exchange and/or a store of value. But a number of blockchains have been created to specifically act either as currencies (Bitcoin, Zcash, Monero…) or operate directly in the world of currencies (Ripple, Stellar, Libra). These are not general computation platforms, which we’re targeting here, so I’ll leave it at that.
        - **Private Chains**: Some blockchains, like Linux Foundation’s Hyperledger project or R3 Corda, are pitched to big companies as a more secure sort of blockchain because they allow those companies to control all of the nodes of the network. While NEAR also has the ability to provide privacy in its network shards, I’ll ignore this category of chains as well because the biggest security advantages come from broad public decentralization not building an oligopoly of a few big companies controlling the chain.
        - **“DAGs”**: This one is the trickiest because these chains play in the blockchain world and are, essentially, doing the same sort of thing — creating an immutable (append-only) ledger. They are called “DAGs” because of the computer science term “Directed Acyclic Graph”, which is the actual data structure that makes them up. Generally speaking, these projects, like IOTA, tend to build a complicated mess of transactions among lots of small devices, which functions a lot like a blockchain. It’s scalable but has a lot of security and implementation challenges.
    - **More about NEAR**
        - ^^So, as we said before, the collection of teams that make up the NEAR Collective is building the NEAR Platform, which is built on top of the NEAR Protocol, which is a **sharded, developer-friendly, proof-of-stake blockchain that developers can build decentralized apps on top of.**^^
        - A Decentralized Network
            - As mentioned above, NEAR is similar in principle to the “cloud-based” infrastructure that developers currently build applications on top of except the cloud is no longer controlled by a single company running a giant data center — that data center is actually made up of all the people around the world who are operating nodes of that decentralized network. Instead of a “company-operated cloud” it is a “community-operated cloud”.
        - Here are a couple of perspectives on why this decentralization is useful:
            - Developers/Entrepreneurs: It’s good to have an application decentralized this way because, as a developer, you aren’t at the mercy of a single company like Amazon or even a government who might want to shut the app down. During the development process, you also get access to a few extra things “for free” like payments and cryptography, which can be a challenge to set up in a traditional application.
            - End Users: It’s better to have a decentralized application in some cases because the code is all open source (so you know exactly what it’s doing) and it can’t be changed once it has been launched (so there’s no chance they’re going to do sketchy things with your money or data)
        - The NEAR Token
            - So who actually runs all those individual “nodes” that make up this decentralized network? Anyone who feels properly incentivized to do so!
            - ^^The NEAR token is how people who use applications on the network pay to submit transactions to the nodes who actually run the network.^^ The token is thus a utility — if you hold it, you can use applications hosted on the network.
            - ^^Because NEAR is a permissionless protocol, anyone can run one of the nodes which operate the network by validating transactions which have been submitted to the network.^^ But running infrastructure, even simple code that you can run from a laptop, costs some money and time, so few people would do it for free. Thus, in exchange for performing that service, you earn a portion of the transaction fees paid by users during each block where you are validating transactions.
            - Luckily, you really don’t have to think about this stuff because, as long as you download and start up the standard node program from a reputable source, it all happens behind the scenes by the application code you downloaded and so you aren’t likely to lose your stake.
        - What is the NEAR Collective?
            - NEAR Collective is the globally distributed group of teams, made up of many individual organizations and contributors, who self-organize in order to bring this technology to life.
            - One of the Collective’s projects is writing the initial code and the reference implementation for the open source NEAR network, sort of like building the rocket boosters on the space shuttle.
            - One Collective member worth noting is [the NEAR Foundation](https://near.foundation), a nonprofit entity whose entire goal is to build a vibrant and active long-term ecosystem around the blockchain and which has commissioned the development of the reference implementation of that chain.  The Foundation helps coordinate some of the early development work and governance activities.
        - What is the Path Ahead?
            - We have extraordinary technical teams who are working to make sure the technology is implemented properly but everything they build will be open source.
            - The ecosystem is most useful when there are lots of applications and lots of users who want to use those applications.
            - A lot of projects are focusing on targeting developers to build apps on top of their platforms. That’s obviously important since this is a highly technical field but it’s not the only thing that matters. Specifically, if you look at the history of major development platforms, the ones that are truly successful need to support real, at-scale businesses not just a bunch of side projects.
            - So building an ecosystem that has the kind of functional breadth and technical depth to create at-scale businesses for the long term is everything to us.
            - Luckily, if we succeed, we have the opportunity to drive the greatest wealth creation since the original Internet by helping developers and entrepreneurs everywhere access new markets and build new kinds of businesses on top of the NEAR Protocol.
        - **Why is NEAR going to succeed?**
            - You can take this from two perspectives — **what makes the NEAR Protocol likely to actually get to market and what makes it better to developers/end-users once we get it there?**
            - **Execution Matters**
                - What says the NEAR team is going to out-execute the competition and get into the market with the right technology on the right timeline?
                - For starters… [NEAR has already launched its MainNet genesis](https://near.org/blog/near-mainnet-genesis/)!  And it [handed off operation to the community](https://near.org/blog/near-mainnet-is-now-community-operated/) as planned
            - **Killer Features for Everyone**
                - We describe the NEAR platform as “developer-friendly” or “usable” because it implements approaches at the protocol level which address each of those problems
                - ^^**For developers, NEAR’s contract-based account model allows them to build advanced permissions into their apps and sign transactions on behalf of users.**^^  ^^They also have access to a set of tools that make app composition straightforward and the opportunity for a protocol-level fee rebate which compensates them for creating well-used apps and critical system infrastructure.^^
                - For end users, the flexible account model allows them to benefit from “progressive UX”, which means they don’t have to touch wallets or tokens until they are ready because the application is hiding them behind the scenes.  For their end-users, the way our accounts are set up allows for smoother onboarding experiences which don’t require as many steps or as many annoying wallet pop-ups.
                - For validators, having access to “delegation” at the contract level means that they can create infinitely diversified offerings of their services, thus making NEAR a very attractive place to run validating nodes.
        - What are the use cases for the NEAR blockchain?
            - One of the hottest questions is what the use cases are for blockchains precisely because it hasn’t been definitively answered.
            - A couple of areas to start include gaming and decentralized finance but that’s just the beginning. In many cases, it starts by taking the things people already do on less performant chains — like Open Finance on Ethereum — and scaling them out to more potential users and uses by providing a more versatile and performant chain.
            - In the long run, just like with the original Internet revolution, the earliest use cases are likely just going to bridge the gap until people invent entirely new business models. So, while we’re excited about addressing things in the short term, we’re especially excited about building a toolkit that future entrepreneurs can combine with their creativity to change the world in ways we can’t even imagine now.
            - This is where new ideas around composability of microservices and open/transferrable state (a paradigm we call [the Open Web](https://near.org/blog/the-evolution-of-the-open-web/)) are really exciting. How different will it be to create businesses which sit atop a portfolio of open services rather than gated APIs and centralized platforms? These are new development paradigms that we’ve only scratched the surface of so far.
    - **What should I learn next?**
        - There are a lot of resources out there but I’ll recommend a reasonable path through them.
        - If you’re pretty new to blockchain, start here to get a strong overview of the ecosystem and its development:
            - [Deconstructing the blockchain ecosystem](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y21YtLzGbH0) (2018, [slides](https://www.slideshare.net/ErikTrautman/start-here-deconstructing-the-blockchain-ecosystem))
            - [The state of blockchain product, design and development (2018)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HSiDHML7xf4)
        - Technical Stuff
            - No matter what role you have, you’ll need to get up to speed technically because the lingo is going to come up repeatedly.
            - Generally:
                - [What are decentralized applications and how do they work](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gd-aNfDqgQY) ([slides](https://www.slideshare.net/ErikTrautman/decentralized-applications-101-how-and-why-to-build-a-dapp))
                - Using blockchain in “regular” web and mobile apps ([slides](https://www.slideshare.net/ErikTrautman/using-blockchain-in-regular-web-and-mobile-apps))
                - [An overview of “all you need to know” in blockchain development](https://haseebq.com/the-authoritative-guide-to-blockchain-development/) by Haseeb Qureshi
