- **Type:** #[[__ 🟦  Reference Note]] #[[📥 Inbox]] #[[📝 To Process]] | [[wealth-accumulation]]
- **Source:**  kindle
- **Author:** Thomas J. Stanley Ph.D.
- **Summary:**
- ### Highlights first synced by [[Readwise]] [[November 24th, 2020]]
    - In the course of our investigations, we discovered seven common denominators among those who successfully build wealth. 1. They live well below their means. 2. They allocate their time, energy, and money efficiently, in ways conducive to building wealth. 3. They believe that financial independence is more important than displaying high social status. 4. Their parents did not provide economic outpatient care. 5. Their adult children are economically self-sufficient. 6. They are proficient in targeting market opportunities. 7. They chose the right occupation. 
    - Big Hat No Cattle 
    - Multiply your age times your realized pretax annual household income from all sources except inheritances. Divide by ten. This, less any inherited wealth, is what your net worth should be. 
    - We have developed another simple rule. To be well positioned in the PAW category, you should be worth twice the level of wealth expected. 
    - PAWs are builders of wealth—that is, they are the best at building net worth compared to others in their income/age category. 
    - Being frugal is the cornerstone of wealth-building. 
    - The affluent tend to answer “yes” to three questions we include in our surveys: Were your parents very frugal? Are you frugal? Is your spouse more frugal than you are? 
    - Most of these men play great offense in the game called income generation. 
    - Most of these households also play great defense; that is, they are frugal when it comes to spending for consumer goods and services. 
    - They became millionaires by budgeting and controlling expenses, and they maintain their affluent status the same way. 
    - QUESTION 1: DOES YOUR HOUSEHOLD OPERATE ON AN ANNUAL BUDGET? Do you plan your consumption spending according to a variety of food, clothing, and shelter categories each year? Mrs. Rule does, and so do most millionaires. In fact, in our latest national survey of millionaires, we found that for every 100 millionaires who don’t budget, there are about 120 who do. 
    - QUESTION 2: DO YOU KNOW HOW MUCH YOUR FAMILY SPENDS EACH YEAR FOR FOOD, CLOTHING, AND SHELTER? 
    - QUESTION 3: DO YOU HAVE A CLEARLY DEFINED SET OF DAILY, WEEKLY, MONTHLY, ANNUAL, AND LIFETIME GOALS? 
    - Financially independent people are happier than those in their same income/age cohort who are not financially secure. 
    - QUESTION 4: DO YOU SPEND A LOT OF TIME PLANNING YOUR FINANCIAL FUTURE? 
    - On average, millionaires spend significantly more hours per month studying and planning their future investment decisions, as well as managing their current investments, than high-income nonmillionaires. 
    - To build wealth, minimize your realized (taxable) income and maximize your unrealized income (wealth/capital appreciation without a cash flow). 
    - C. Eugene Steuerle is assistant director of the Office of Tax Analysis in the U.S. Department of the Treasury. He is also a scholar and talented researcher. He asks the same question we do: What is “the relationship between realized income and wealth”? (SOI Bulletin, Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, vol. 2, no. 4, Spring 1985) What does he find? That people accumulate significant wealth by minimizing their realized/taxable income and maximizing their unrealized/nontaxable income. 
    - you’re not yet wealthy but want to be someday, never purchase a home that requires a mortgage that is more than twice your household’s total annual realized income. 
    - Efficiency is one of the most important components of wealth accumulation. Simply: People who become wealthy allocate their time, energy, and money in ways consistent with enhancing their net worth. 
    - PAWs allocate nearly twice the number of hours per month to planning their financial investments as UAWs do. 
    - Begin earning and investing early in your adult life. 
    - Operating a household without a budget is akin to operating a business without a plan, without goals, and without direction. 
    - What if your household generates even a moderately high income and both you and your spouse are frugal? You have the foundation for becoming and maintaining PAW status. On the other hand, it is very difficult for a married couple to accumulate wealth if one is a spendthrift. A household divided in its financial orientation is unlikely to accumulate significant wealth. 
    - Dr. North and PAWs in general, on the other hand, allocate their spare time to activities that they hope will enhance their wealth (see Table 3-6 later in chapter). Such activities include studying and planning their investment strategies and managing current investments. We will study this issue in greater detail later in this chapter. 
    - What do you spend time worrying about? Are your concerns congruent with wealth accumulation? Or do you spend time thinking about issues that are impediments to becoming affluent? How do PAWs and UAWs differ in regard to their fears and concerns? In simple terms, UAWs worry more than PAWs. PAWs and UAWs also worry about different issues. Overall, PAWs have significantly fewer concerns and fears than their counterparts. 
    - Most millionaires who are PAWs are self-employed. Being self-employed gives one much more control over one’s economic future than does working for others. 
    - Most PAWs agree with the following statements, while most UAWs disagree: ♦ I spend a lot of time planning my financial future. ♦ Usually, I have sufficient time to handle my investments properly. ♦ When it comes to the allocation of my time, I place the management of my own assets before my other activities. 
    - Planning is typically found to be a strong habit among people who have a demonstrated propensity to accumulate wealth. Planning and wealth accumulation are significant correlates even among investors with modest incomes. 
    - Often, active investors spend more time trading than studying and planning their investments. Conversely, millionaires spend more time studying far fewer offerings. Thus, they can focus their time and energy—the resources needed to master their understanding of a much smaller variety of offerings in the market. 
    - Another correlate of wealth accumulation is employment of a CPA, not just to do taxes but also to provide various kinds of investment advice. 
    - We selected our CPAs based on two criteria. First, the CPAs were recommended by professors of accounting. Second, the CPAs were initially hired out of college by major accounting firms and later started their own successful accounting firms. We find that many of the very best CPAs and financial planners follow this career path. 
    - Mr. Allan, as well as those people whom he has backed financially, have never felt that their purpose in life was to look wealthy. According to Mr. Allan, “That’s why I’m financially independent”: If your goal is to become financially secure, you’ll likely attain it…. But if your motive is to make money to spend money on the good life,… you’re never gonna make it. 
    - Mr. Allan recognizes that many status artifacts can be a burden, if not an impediment, to becoming financially independent. Life has its own burdens. Why add excess baggage? 
    - People often ask us, “Should I lease?” Our answer is always the same: More than 80 percent of millionaires purchase their vehicles. If and when more than 50 percent begin leasing, we will change our recommendation. 
    - The majority of people do not have the ability to increase their incomes significantly. Yet income is a positive correlate of wealth. What, then, is our message? If you cannot increase your compensation significantly, become wealthy some other way. Do it defensively. 
    - What can you give your children to enhance the probability that they will become economically productive adults? In addition to an education, create an environment that honors independent thoughts and deeds, cherishes individual achievements, and rewards responsibility and leadership. 
    - The more dollars adult children receive, the fewer dollars they accumulate, while those who are given fewer dollars accumulate more. 
    - Courage can be developed. But it cannot be nurtured in an environment that eliminates all risks, all difficulty, all dangers. 
    - Most of the affluent in America are business owners, including self-employed professionals. Twenty percent of the affluent households in America are headed by retirees. Of the remaining 80 percent, more than two-thirds are headed by self-employed owners of businesses. In America, fewer than one in five households, or about 18 percent, is headed by a self-employed business owner or professional. But these self-employed people are four times more likely to be millionaires than those who work for others. 
    - Nor does an industry label make the business owner wealthy. It takes talent and discipline to generate profits and ultimately wealth. 
    - They can take your business, but they can’t take your intellect! What does this mean? A government and/or a creditor can confiscate a business composed of land, machinery, coal pits, buildings, and so on. It can’t confiscate your intellect. What do professionals sell? Not coal, not paint, not even pizza. What they sell most of all is their intellect. 
