- **Type:** #[[__ 🟦  Reference Note]] | [[Writing]]
- **Author:** [[Monica Lent]]
- **Project(s):** 
- **Summary:** 
- **Highlights:**
    - Here are my tips for effectively distributing content and things to consider when deciding where to post your brand-spankin-new article.
    - **Where and how to distribute your content** [[🟨 Distributing your blog content]]
        - **Submit your sitemap in Google Search Console:** Google will automatically crawl your site for new content, but it never hurts to submit your sitemap by hand either. You can find this in the "Sitemaps" section of GSC.
        - **Share your content on Twitter:** I don't think it's shameful to use 1-2 hashtags to help extend your reach. I often use the programming language and the library name (e.g. # javascript # reactjs) if it's relevant for the post. Be sure to @-mention any companies or technologies you're using, as they may re-share your content!
        - **Post your article in Facebook Groups: **You need to be careful about whether the group permits posting of community content, or if they consider it spamming. Make sure your post is on-topic and relevant (ideally, directly helpful!) to the members, and when in doubt, ask an admin or moderator before posting. You can probably get a sense just by looking on the Wall and seeing if sharing is encouraged.
        - **Post your article on LinkedIn:** Like most developers, I avoid LinkedIn as much as possible, but for some types of content it's a great distribution channel (especially if you're writing about topics like product management, or something at your job where the company LinkedIn or HR team can re-share your post).
        - **Post your article on Reddit:** I'm not a big Reddit reader, but there are subreddits you can distribute to such as /r/reactjs. In most communities, helps to be an active member before just going in and sharing your content, so try and hang out a bit first. Developers can be especially sensitive to self-promotion by people they don't already "know"...and just sensitive in general
        - **Post your article on Hacker News: **If you do this you're braver than me. But it can be done :) I had a post go viral on Hacker News once and by staying away from the comments, I just got a bunch of nice emails from people! It wasn't as bad as I expected at all, and that month my Twitter following grew by 1,500 people
        - **Syndicate your article:** You can syndicate your content on Medium or ThePracticalDev (or other places), using your canonical URL. Always include a link back to the original article on YOUR DOMAIN if possible, so you can bring people to your territory (and your email list). Try a text like "This article was originally published on [Your Site Name]. Head over there if you like this post and want to read others like it."
        - **Send your new article to your email list: **You can automate this using an RSS feed, but I think people (especially developers) notice the personal touch :) ConvertKit makes it easy to set this up so anytime you post something, they'll make a draft and email you to remind you to email your subscribers about your new article. Three cheers for automation.
