- **Type:** #[[__ 🟦  Reference Note]] | [[wealth-accumulation]] [[Success]]
- **Source:**  kindle
- **Author:** Napoleon Hill, Arthur Pell, and Arthur R. Pell
- **Summary:**
- ### Highlights first synced by [[Readwise]] [[November 24th, 2020]]
    - One of the most common causes of failure is the habit of quitting when one is overtaken by temporary defeat. Every person is guilty of this mistake at one time or another. 
    - More than 500 of the most successful people America has ever known told the author their greatest success came just one step beyond the point at which defeat had overtaken them. Failure is a trickster with a keen sense of irony and cunning. It takes great delight in tripping one up when success is almost within reach. 
    - One of the main weaknesses of mankind is the average person’s familiarity with the word ‘impossible’. He knows all the rules that will not work. He knows all the things that cannot be done. This book was written for those who seek the rules that have made others successful, and are willing to stake everything on those rules. 
    - Success comes to those who become success conscious. Failure comes to those who indifferently allow themselves to become failure conscious. 
    - He should have told us that before we can accumulate riches in great abundance, we must magnetise our minds with intense desire for riches, that we must become ‘money conscious’ until the desire for money drives us to create definite plans for acquiring it. 
    - Barnes’ desire was not a hope. It was not a wish. It was a keen, pulsating desire, which transcended everything else. It was definite. 
    - Barnes succeeded because he chose a definite goal, and placed all his energy, all his willpower and all his effort into achieving that goal. He did not become the partner of Edison the day he arrived. He was content to start in the most menial work, as long as it provided an opportunity to take even one step towards his cherished goal. 
    - Every person who wins in any undertaking must be willing to burn his ships and cut all sources of retreat. Only by so doing can one be sure of maintaining that state of mind known as a burning desire to win, essential to success. 
    - The method by which desire for riches can be transmuted into its financial equivalent consists of six definite, practical steps: 1. Fix in your mind the exact amount of money you desire. It is not sufficient merely to say, ‘I want plenty of money.’ Be definite as to the amount. (There is a psychological reason for definiteness which will be described in a subsequent chapter.) 2. Determine exactly what you intend to give in return for the money you desire. (There is no such reality as ‘something for nothing’.) 3. Establish a definite date when you intend to possess the money you desire. 4. Create a definite plan for carrying out your desire, and begin at once, whether you are ready or not, to put this plan into action. 5. Write out a clear, concise statement of the amount of money you intend to acquire. Name the time limit for its acquisition. State what you intend to give in return for the money, and describe clearly the plan through which you intend to accumulate it. 6. Read your written statement aloud, twice daily, once just before retiring at night, and once after rising in the morning. AS YOU READ, SEE AND FEEL AND BELIEVE YOURSELF ALREADY IN POSSESSION OF THE MONEY. 
    - Here is where a burning desire will come to your aid. If you truly desire money so keenly that your desire is an obsession, you will have no difficulty in convincing yourself that you will acquire it. The object is to want money, and to become so determined to have it that you convince yourself you will have it. 
    - Only those who become ‘money conscious’ ever accumulate great riches. Money consciousness means that the mind has become so thoroughly saturated with the desire for money that one can see oneself already in possession of it. 
    - One must realise that all who have accumulated great fortunes first did a certain amount of dreaming, hoping, wishing, desiring and planning before they acquired money. 
    - Behind this demand for new and better things there is one quality one must possess to win, and that is definiteness of purpose, the knowledge of what one wants, and a burning desire to possess it. 
    - success requires no apologies, failure permits no alibis. 
    - Thomas Edison dreamed of a lamp that could be operated by electricity. Despite more than 10,000 failures, he stood by that dream until he made it a physical reality. Practical dreamers do not quit! 
    - A burning desire to be and to do is the starting point from which the dreamer must take off. Dreams are not born of indifference, laziness or lack of ambition. The world no longer scoffs at dreamers, nor calls them impractical. Remember, too, that all who succeed in life get off to a bad start, and pass through many heartbreaking struggles before they ‘arrive’. The turning point in the lives of those who succeed usually comes at the moment of some crisis, through which they are introduced to their ‘other selves’. 
    - There is a difference between wishing for a thing and being ready to receive it. No one is ready for a thing until he believes he can acquire it. The state of mind must be belief, not mere hope or wish. Open-mindedness is essential for belief. Closed minds do not inspire faith, courage or belief. 
    - I bargained with Life for a penny And Life would pay no more, However I begged at evening When I counted my scanty store.   For Life is a just employer, He gives you what you ask, But once you have set the wages, Why, you must bear the task.   I worked for a menial’s hire, Only to learn, dismayed, That any wage I had asked of Life, Life would have willingly paid. 
    - Mary Kay preached and practised that the first step in achieving success is to firmly believe that you are an excellent person who deserves success. In an article in Personal Excellence, she suggested some exercises to help create your image of excellence and begin to establish an atmosphere of success in your life. Here are some of her suggestions:   IMAGINE YOURSELF SUCCESSFUL. Always picture yourself successful.Visualise the person you desire to become. Set aside time each day to be alone and undisturbed. Get comfortable and relax. Close your eyes and concentrate on your desires and goals. See yourself in this new environment, capable and self-confident.   REFLECT ON YOUR PAST SUCCESSES. Every success, be it large or small, is proof that you are capable of achieving more successes. Celebrate each success.You can recall it when you begin to lose faith in yourself.   SET DEFINITE GOALS. Have a clear direction of where you want to go. Be aware when you begin to deviate from these goals and take immediate corrective action. RESPOND POSITIVELY TO LIFE. Develop a positive self-image.Your image, your reactions to life and your decisions are completely within your control. 
    - ‘Our only limitations are those we set up in our own minds’. 
