- **Type:** #[[__ 🟦  Reference Note]] #[[📥 Inbox]] #[[📝 To Process]] | [[Veganism]]
- **Source:**  kindle
- **Author:** Matt Frazier, Stepfanie Romine
- **Summary:**
- ### Highlights first synced by [[Readwise]] [[November 24th, 2020]]
    - Introduction 
    - In both the 2012 and 2014 Olympic games, vegetarian and vegan athletes won medals, and in the 2016 games, the only male powerlifter on the United States’ team was vegan Kendrick Farris. 
    - Our species evolved through a huge variety of climates and environments, some of which provided little more than fruits and vegetables, others in which animal flesh was plentiful. As a result, we’re not strictly carnivores or herbivores, but omnivores. We can survive, and even thrive, on a stunning variety of diets, and there’s no better example of this than the fact that the winner of any given 100-mile ultramarathon might be vegan, fruitarian, or Paleo. In the short term, at least for fitness and moving toward an ideal weight, almost any diet based on whole foods works. (And, not surprisingly, just about any diet based on processed foods doesn’t.) 
    - health can be expressed as the total amount of nutrition we get (macronutrients and micronutrients such as vitamins, minerals, and phytochemicals) divided by the total number of calories we consume in order to get those nutrients. 
    - health = nutrients/calories. 
    - So what does this have to do with athletes? Well, it’s known that digestion requires a large amount of energy. And the more calories we consume, the more energy our bodies must allocate to this energy-expensive process. So if we can get all the nutrients we need to repair our muscles and cardiovascular system in fewer total calories with plants than we can with animal products and junk food, then we can recover more efficiently. The extra energy that we don’t use for digestion can be put toward rebuilding, and the result is faster recovery. 
    - The anti-inflammatory properties of plants are also crucial. While many animal products cause inflammation, phytonutrients and compounds in plant foods actually fight it. 
    - I believe it’s easier to transition to vegan if you first become vegetarian; likewise, it’s easier to adopt a whole food, plant-based diet if your first foray still includes some familiar ingredients. For most people, too drastic a change is a recipe for failure, so I’m a huge proponent of the gradual transition. 
    - Chapter 1 PLANT-BASED NUTRITION IN A NUTSHELL 
    - If you’re an athlete, your diet matters as much as your training. Food fuels you. The best equipment, training plans, and coaching won’t matter if your tank is empty—or you’re using the wrong fuel. 
    - Whether you’re a casual runner or a competitive cyclist, chances are you’ve experienced a bad workout. More often than not, exercise gone awry can be traced back to a lifestyle choice—lack of sleep, stress, or the wrong food (or simply not enough food). 
    - Matt has learned one valuable lesson that transcends both diet and exercise. It’s about habit change, and it’s this: The positive changes you make for thirty days or three months or even a year don’t matter. Not a bit, unless they continue or give way to even more positive changes. 
    - It’s not about “following a diet,” it’s about a creating a lifestyle, 
    - Forget macronutrient ratios, protein grams, and calorie counts for now. Start with the simplest of guidelines—the advice to make whole plant foods as large a portion of your diet as you can—and go from there. This simplicity, and the resultant lack of stress around food, will prove to be your greatest ally in making these changes last. 
    - simple formula for health, as much as there is one, comes from Dr. Fuhrman: Health equals nutrients divided by calories (H = N/C). In other words, the more micronutrients you can get in the fewest number of calories, while still eating whole foods, the healthier you’ll be. 
    - From a health perspective, lots of micronutrients in relatively few calories means your body gets lots of the raw materials it needs to repair and protect itself, without having to do excessive work (and creating excessive waste) in the way of metabolizing calories. 
    - If you eat whole foods, you don’t need to worry about getting enough protein. Even when those foods are plants. 
    - So what type of diet gets you in this range? You guessed it: a whole food, plant-based one. Over 25 percent of the calories in most beans comes from protein, with chickpeas, lentils, and soybeans being more than 30 percent protein. Almonds are 15 percent protein; whole wheat is 14 percent. Most fruits contain less protein than these foods, but take a look at some common vegetables: 34 percent of broccoli’s calories are protein; kale is 35 percent protein. And Popeye was onto something with spinach: Over half of its calories are from protein. 
    - Oil is the fatty part of what was a whole food. When the oil is pressed out, it brings with it many of the calories but leaves behind most of the valuable micronutrients in the plant it was removed from. Lots of calories, not many nutrients: In other words, oil doesn’t score high on the H = N/C scale. 
    - So to lose weight, just stick to foods that are near the top of the list, in the top three or four slots. You can eat those until you’re completely full, whenever you’re hungry, and you’ll likely find that your body moves quickly toward its ideal weight. (This also applies to those of us trying to maintain our weight as we age.) 
    - 1 Fruits, especially berries HOW TO GET THEM DAILY: A few handfuls in a smoothie, first thing in the morning. We almost always use frozen berries—which aren’t much different from fresh in terms of nutrition—but when they’re in season and we can get them at the farmers market or from the farm, we’ll use fresh. 
    - 2 Leafy green and cruciferous vegetables HOW TO GET THEM DAILY: Salads, smoothies, and sautéed as a side 
    - 3 Nuts and seeds HOW TO GET THEM DAILY: Use 1 to 2 tablespoons per smoothie or salad. Our favorites: flaxseeds (be sure to grind them), chia seeds, pumpkin seeds, walnuts 
    - Turmeric—and other herbs and spices How to get them daily: In just about everything you eat! Add flavor to salad dressings, cooked grains, and even smoothies (cardamom, basil, or cinnamon). 
    - 5 Beans How to get them daily: In a wrap with veggies for breakfast, sweetened for a snack, in a dip such as hummus, and as the base for your dinner 
    - 6 Onions and garlic How to get them daily: As the foundation of flavor for every dish you sauté! 
    - 7 Mushrooms HOW TO GET THEM DAILY: By sipping on homemade mushroom broth, sautéing them for your morning tofu wrap, or in stir-fries. (Mushrooms should be eaten cooked, not raw, as they contain toxins that are deactivated when cooked.) 
    - 8 Green tea How to get it daily: During an afternoon break from work—either brewed hot or iced from the fridge (the leaves are good for three infusions) 
    - Other Foods to Eat Several Times a Week Though the above foods are the ones worth designing your daily food habits around, there are many others that fill out a varied plant-based diet. You’ll see that these foods also show up in a lot of our recipes. 1 Avocado (often on toast or in place of dressing on a salad) 2 Coconut products (coconut butter or manna, coconut milk) 3 Ginger (sometimes as tea and in smoothies or stir-fries) 4 Tomatoes (raw in salads or cooked in stews and main dishes) 5 Lemon juice (to brighten up a dish) 6 Dates (usually as fuel during a run, or in treats) 7 Dark chocolate (as a treat) 
    - Vitamin B12 is as close as you’ll find to a universally recommended supplement for those eating 100 percent plant-based diets, so that’s one we highly suggest. 
    - We’re all for whole foods, and with a varied diet you can probably get most of what you need. But as a safeguard, we like to take a multivitamin. 
    - there are several nutrients that are commonly deficient in 100 percent plant-based diets. According to Dr. Fuhrman in Super Immunity, these are: • Vitamin B12 • Zinc • Iodine • Vitamin D • Vitamin K2 • Omega-3 fatty acids 
        - **Tags**: [[read]]
        - **Note**: .read
    - Chapter 2 YOUR PLANT-BASED KITCHEN 
    - Braise: Slow-cooking food—such as vegetables, beans, tofu, or tempeh—in a small amount of liquid (usually water or broth). You can add aromatics such as carrots, onions, or garlic, as well as a bit of acid such as wine, vinegar, or citrus juice, to keep the vegetables from turning to mush and add extra flavor. Braising can be done on the stovetop or in the oven, and it helps dishes develop more flavor without oil. This technique is best used for beans and hard vegetables, though delicate vegetables and fresh herbs can be added at the end. 
    - Broil: Cooking food under direct heat to brown it. Broiling essentially produces the same results as grilling, though the heat source is on top instead of below. This technique works well for foods that cook quickly, such as tofu, bell peppers, and eggplant. 
    - Roast (and Bake): Roasting and baking are essentially the same technique; the only real difference is oven temperature. Baking is gentler with lower oven temperatures—350 to 400°F (180 to 200°C)—and results in little to no browning. When baking, dishes can be covered or uncovered. Roasting typically requires a temperature of at least 400°F (200°C); the increased heat concentrates flavor and promotes browning. With roasting, dishes are not covered. 
    - Sauté: Meaning “to jump” in French, sautéing involves cooking food in a small amount of hot oil. It creates a browned exterior by drawing out a plant-based food’s natural sugars. This browning process not only adds color; it concentrates flavor as well. Choose a skillet that’s large enough to hold your food in a single layer; piled up, it will steam rather than sauté. 
    - Boiling is used for pasta, vegetables, and other foods that you want to cook at a high temperature and with constant motion. The bubbles will be big and rapid, and your burner will be turned to high or medium-high, depending on your stove and the amount of water and food you’re cooking. 
    - Simmering is less intense, and it’s used to cook foods such as root veggies or sauces more gently. The bubbles are barely visible and come to the surface one at a time every second or two. Your heat will be lower, around medium-low, and liquid is kept just below the boiling point. 
    - Chopped: Cut into larger pieces, about the size of a die. 
    - Diced: Cut into smaller pieces, about the size of a pencil eraser. 
    - Minced: For garlic, shallots, ginger, and anything else that you want evenly dispersed throughout a dish. Use your chef’s knife to chop, chop, chop until there are no discernable pieces, 
    - Sliced: Cut only in one direction. 
    - Brown first, add liquid second. One downside of replacing oil with broth or water is that, instead of sautéing, you get more of a steaming effect and lose the color and flavor of a true sauté. To brown food without using oil, add your ingredients to a hot pan and let them sit for a minute (don’t move them!) before adding the liquid to prevent burning. (To reduce the steaming effect, don’t crowd the pan. Give food plenty of space in a single layer.) 
    - Be choosy about your salt and sugar. This doesn’t mean load up on them. Instead, if you choose sweet and salty ingredients with depth and substance over plain sugar or salt, you can replace much of the flavor that oil contributes. For sauces, choose dates, maple syrup, or dark brown sugar instead of plain sugar to add a caramelized flavor. Pick olives, miso, or capers for salty richness. These additional layers will add complexity and ample flavor to your final dish. 
    - Lean on umami. Fat helps develop flavor in foods, but it’s not the only path to flavor town. (Sorry, did that just sound like something Guy Fieri would say?) Umami, which means “pleasant savory taste” in Japanese, is found in foods rich in glutamates—compounds that contribute a full, robust flavor to food. Meat is rich in it, but in our plant-based food pyramid, there are plenty of other umami-rich options: fermented foods, mushrooms, sea veggies, sun-dried tomatoes, tomato paste, miso, soy sauce, etc. We use plenty of these foods in our dishes. 
    - Save time and money on dry goods by using an online warehouse club like Thrive Market, or use Amazon Prime or Vitacost. You can even “subscribe and save” on things you buy regularly. 
    - Almond milk: Unless noted, assume almond milk is unsweetened and unflavored. We like the 365 brand organic unsweetened almond milk, 
    - Apple cider vinegar: To get the maximum nutritional benefits of apple cider vinegar, it’s best to use raw, unfiltered, and organic. 
    - Arrowroot: We use arrowroot powder to thicken recipes and absorb moisture in breadings. It is similar to cornstarch yet superior. We prefer arrowroot’s neutral flavor and more resilient nature. 
    - Broth or stock: For oil-free options, we just say “broth.” 
    - The Classic Unsweetened Native Forest brand (available at Whole Foods or health food stores and in bulk via Amazon) doesn’t use whiteners, is organic, and comes in BPA-free cans. 
    - Flour: The recipes in this book always use whole wheat flour. You want the fiber and, especially, the protein and nutrients from the whole grain. 
    - Miso paste: Miso is fermented soybean paste. It’s packed with probiotics and contributes a salty, savory note to dishes. You’ll find it in the refrigerated section of your supermarket (often with the tofu and vegan meat substitutes) divided by color. 
    - Nutritional yeast: These yellow flakes are commonly used to boost umami and “cheesy” flavor in plant-based recipes. A form of inert yeast, nutritional yeast contains 8 grams of protein and 4 grams of fiber per 1½ tablespoon serving. Choose varieties that are fortified with B vitamins, such as Red Star or Bragg. 
    - Agar: We use agar as a thickening agent in our No-Bake Mocha Cheesecake. Made from algae, these clear flakes (it also comes in block form) are traditionally used to thicken Japanese jelly desserts. You can find it in the Asian aisle of most supermarkets, and at Japanese grocers it may be called kanten. Get creative with your agar, but don’t use it with citrus, as the acid will prevent it from setting properly. 
    - Dulse: Dulse is a reddish brown sea vegetable that’s grown in the northern Atlantic and Pacific. When lightly panfried (with or without oil), it takes on the texture of bacon, with (arguably) a similar taste. You can use it crumbled on our Lifesaving Bowl, atop stir-fries, or in sandwiches. It provides iron, calcium, magnesium and potassium, among other vitamins and minerals. 
    - Kombu: We like to add a 1-inch (2.5 cm) square of this sea veggie to our beans as they cook to add depth of flavor and increase digestibility. Kombu is high in iodine and contains iron and calcium. 
    - To remove the bitter taste tempeh often has, cube it or pierce the block all over with a fork and then steam it for 10 minutes over 1 inch (2.5 cm) of water before using it in a recipe. 
    - Tofu: Unless noted, we suggest using organic, extra-firm tofu. Choose a sprouted variety if available. In the eastern United States, Twin Oaks is a good choice. It’s made in Virginia by a small co-op. Their herbed tofu is delicious enough to slice raw, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and eat on a sandwich. 
    - Umeboshi paste: An umami-rich paste made from pickled, salted sour plums. The color comes from red shiso leaves. Ume plums are good for digestion, and the Japanese use them to help nausea (and hangovers). They are also thought to promote stamina and were a part of the samurais’ field rations! 
    - Chapter 3 Morning Meals to Motivate & Power Your Day 
    - Dan Buettner takes a look at the pockets of societies around the world that produce the largest number of centenarians (people who are 100 years old or older) per capita. The results are not only fascinating, but they affirm the benefits of a plant-based diet—and they have more than a few things to say about the way we should eat breakfast. 
    - Beans make a frequent appearance at the breakfast tables of Blue Zones families. 
    - Chapter 4 DINNERS & HEARTY MEALS TO FUEL & AID RECOVERY 
    - It’s repeated so often it’s almost a cliché, but it’s on target so we’ll say it again: Though many people look at a plant-based diet as a restrictive one—one that simply eliminates foods—anyone who has actually adopted it knows that the opposite is true. When you can no longer rely on the old meat-and-potato standbys, suddenly you’re forced to branch out into new and unexplored ways of eating—and the result is dozens of (or maybe even a hundred) new foods in your diet. 
    - Why Soak Grains and Legumes? Grains and legumes contain varying levels of phytates, which interfere with your body’s ability to access the nutrition in these foods. Soaking them overnight in water with a bit of acid can help remove some of the phytates and cut down on cooking time. 
    - Chapter 5 Get Your Greens: Salads & Dressings 
    - Believe it or not, you really don’t need a recipe for salad dressing. You can create endless varieties, with ingredients you probably already have on hand, if you stick to the ratios listed in this simple blueprint. 
    - 1 part acid (vinegar, tomatoes, citrus juice, or mustard) 3 parts oil or creamy ingredient (avocado, nut butter, tofu, hummus, or pureed beans) Flavorings to taste (fresh or dried herbs, spices, onion/shallot, ginger, or garlic) Salt and black pepper to taste Process all the ingredients in a blender or shake together in a small jar with a lid until smooth. 
    - Chapter 6 Small Plates & Sides 
    - Chapter 7 Fuel & Recovery: Real Food for Before, During & After Workouts 
    - Chapter 8 Flavor Boosts (Spice Blends, Sauces & Other Tasty Add-Ons) 
    - Chapter 9 Double-Duty Desserts: Sweets That Work for Your Body 
    - Chapter 10 MEAL PLANNING: MAKING THESE RECIPES WORK IN YOUR REAL LIFE 
    - With meal planning, a little goes a long way, and there are two approaches we recommend for beginners. One is to embrace the “cook once, eat twice” method of always cooking double the amount you’ll need for one meal. It’s straightforward and simple. 
