- **Type:** #[[__ 🟦  Reference Note]] | [[Fiction]]
- **Source:**  kindle
- **Author:** John Graves
- **Summary:**
- ### Highlights first synced by [[Readwise]] [[November 24th, 2020]]
    - Whatever their effect, I tend to think they symbolize a further degeneration of the country; there is about them a smell of the burnt Near East where their breed began; they seem a portent. This region raised antelope and buffalo with rich fat on their ribs once, and later its longhorns were the sturdiest that went up the trails. Now the cedar has spread its sterile shade in the flats where grass no longer grows, and though some of the upland ranches with sentient owners still show thick carpets of curly mesquite and grama and buffalo and blue-stem grasses, and some even of the damaged parts can be brought back, most of the earth’s surface there will never again be what it was. Goats and other such Mediterranean fauna—burros, and magpies, and tawny water thrifty rodents that live among the rocks—somehow symbolize for me those lands that will never again be what they were. One waxes pessimistic? Not so much … There is a pessimism about land which, after it has been with you a long time, becomes merely factual. Men increase; country suffers. Though I sign up with organizations that oppose the process, I sign without great hope.… Islands of wildlife and native flora may be saved, as they should be, but the big, sloppy, rich, teeming spraddle will go. It always has. 
    - We don’t know much about solitude these days, nor do we want to. A crowded world thinks that aloneness is always loneliness, and that to seek it is perversion. Maybe so. Man is a colonial creature and owes most of his good fortune to his ability to stand his fellows’ feet on his corns and the musk of their armpits in his nostrils. Company comforts him; those around him share his dreams and bear the slings and arrows with him.… But there have always been some of the others, the willful loners. And out alone for a time yourself, you have some illusion of knowing why they are as they are. You hear the big inhuman pulse they listen for, by themselves, and you know their shy nausea around men and the relief of escape. Or you think you do.… 
    - The thing was, I had once known what bird that whistle belonged to. Knowledge of that kind takes so long to come by, solidly at least, and there is so much of it to try to have before you die, if you care anything about it, that to lose any small part of what you do have seems unfair. 
